
CHAPTER IX .
EXCURSIONS TO WADY FARAH AND LIFTAH .
THE sun was gilding the tops of the olive
trees on Mount Olivet when we passed the
Church of Ascension on our way to Wady
Farah-one of the most lovely spots in all the
neighborhood of the Holy City . Merrily we
cantered over the hills in the fresh morning
air, father and brother mounted on their
prancing steeds , myself seated on my little.
donkey, while faithful Mahmoud, well armed,
and our dog, made up our little party. And
here it behooves me to pay a passing tribute
to " Pharaoh Necho, " the prince of donkeys,
and " Dickens ," the noblest of the canine race .
Struck with the many marks of beauty exhibited
in Pharaoh Necho's form, a Russian
(155)
156 HADJI IN SYRIA.
nobleman had selected him from a choice lot
arrayed for his inspection while at Cairo . On
reaching Jerusalem, having no further use for
him, he offered him for sale at the low price
of four hundred piastres, assuring us that he
had kept before the caravan throughout the
journey from Cairo to Jerusalem through the
long desert. Of course the temptation to purchase
him was irresistible. Every one congratulated
me on my good fortune, and said
there had never been seen such a donkey in
the streets of Jerusalem. Right proudly did I
mount him, when, shortly after the purchase,
he was brought to me saddled and bridled for
my first ride. He was mouse-colored, his skin
soft and glossy ; his limbs delicately and exquisitely
formed, and striped à la zebra. Accoutred
in true Arab style , with a crimson saddle
cloth , gayly adorned with tinsel, and bridle
hung with every species of oriental paraphernalia,
he never failed to strike every one with
the most profound admiration ; and the little
EXCURSIONS TO WADY FARAH AND LIFTAH . 157
He
boys who came in his way with his hind feet !
He has been known to whip three camels in a
fair fight ; and was justly called a hyena for his
ferocity. As for his gait, it was compared by
the Arabs to the swiftness of the wind ! The
donkey and the dog were inseparable ; and the
enjoyment of a ride was never considered complete
by any party concerned, without the
barking of the dog, harmoniously blended with
the braying of the donkey ! The sagacity of
" Dickens" justly merits a word of praise .
exhibited a limited knowledge of the Arabic
language, and was quite accomplished in the
art of singing. Now, while Monsieur Dickens
was, of course, unable to express himself in
words, he showed that he perfectly understood
us whenever an order was given to saddle the
donkey, by the most frantic demonstrations of
delight ; and such was his passion for music,
that whenever he heard the sound of the guitar
or accordeon , he would immediately discover
my whereabouts ; and if at first I refused
14
158 HADJI IN SYRIA .
admittance, his piteous moans would soon induce
me to open the door ; and while resting
his head in my lap, he would accompany the
instrument without making a discordant note ;
on the contrary, his voice was quite musical,
and wonderfully like that of a human being.
ours.
On several occasions, when we expelled him
from our little chapel, he found his way to the
top of an opposite house , from whence he could
hear our hymns, and unite his voice with
But Dickens, though a wonderful dog,
had one serious fault, which was his great antipathy
to the Jews. On the approach of an
Israelite, meanly clad, his custom was to jump
upon him, and, forcing him to the ground, leave
him unhurt, though badly frightened . He
was, however, very polite to Turks and Christians
.
Following our rocky path a short distance
beyond Mount Olivet, we made a detour to a
fountain, of which marvellous accounts were
afloat . Our guide here pretended to call the
EXCURSIONS TO WADY FARAH AND LIFTAH. 159
water forth from the ground , and in a few minutes
cause it again to subside, by repeating a
mysteriously worded chant. Sure enough , on
singing a long incantation , of which the chorus
was, " the colored man whipped the white
man," the water immediately gushed forth ;
and allowing a little while to elapse, he reversed
the chorus, and the water disappeared
beneath the ground . By remaining on the
spot a short time, however, we discovered it
was one of the wonders of nature, instead of a
miraculous display of human power ; and had
we remained days on the spot, the stream
would have continued to appear and disappear
at regular intervals . Returning to the path ,
we descended with the greatest difficulty the
steep, precipitous route to Wady Farah, or the
“ Valley of Delight, " for such is the signification
of the name. We were often compelled
to dismount and walk-to remain in the saddle
being dangerous both to rider and beast . The
last hill that hid the lovely Eden from our
160 HADJI IN SYRIA.
-
view was now safely passed , and I fully realized
the high expectations that had been raised by
the glowing description given me by my father
and brothers, who had already visited it several
times. Their last visit , however, gave occasion
for anything but pleasant recollections of the
place for they were shot at by the fierce
Arabs, who frequent the caves in the sides of
the hills, and were obliged to flee for their
lives . The cause of this savage treatment was
my father's purchase of the valley ; and the
Arabs, supposing that the Frank intruders had
come to take possession of the place , adopted
this method of showing their decided unwil
lingness to share with them their paradisaic
rendezvous .
One of the offenders having been caught,
and subjected to a long imprisonment, was sent
to beg their pardon, and kiss their feet . But
he was readily pardoned, such abject humiliation
not being required . Quiet having been
EXCURSIONS TO WADY FARAH AND LIFTAH . 161
restored by the good old Pacha, we entertained
no fear of a second adventure .
Nothing could have been more peaceful than
the aspect of the valley when we entered it,
and listened with charmed senses to the chirping
of the birds, and the musical gurgling of
the water which coursed the valley, now emptying
itself into a marble basin , and now retreating
beneath a hiding-place of luxuriant clusters
of shrubbery. As for its other occupants , there
was nothing in them calculated to inspire the
most timid with emotions even approaching to
fear, for its sole tenants, besides the birds, were
a few conies climbing the rocks, some Arab
women filling their skins with water, and
quantities of tiny fish sporting in the basins ;
while the graceful form of a gazelle might occasionally
be seen disappearing behind a hill-top
in the distance. The basins of fish, as well as
a few remains of masonry, and some ancient
coins, we could account for in no other way
than to conjecture that they were the remains 14 *
162 HADJI IN SYRIA .
of improvements made by the crusaders, who
on discovering this lovely retreat employed the
chisel and hammer, as well to increase its
attractiveness as to render useful the advantages
so bountifully bestowed by the hand of
nature. On either side of the valley are towering
ledges of rock, in which rooms have been
hewn, at least as far back as the days of the
crusaders, for the purpose of affording safe
retreats in time of danger. They can only be
reached by means of a long ladder, which was
afterwards procured, carried down there , and
such of the rooms as could be reached were
explored . At the upper end of the valley is
an amphitheatrical cave, of such immense size
and height that I never experienced greater
awe than that inspired by this grand old
church, sculptured and fashioned by the hand
of nature, or in other words, by the hand of
the great Jehovah. From the location of this
valley it is thought to be " Enon near to Salim,
where John was baptizing because there was
EXCURSIONS TO WADY FARAH AND LIFTAH. 163
much water there ;" for it is not only near a
ruined city, and a valley called Salem by the
Arabs to this day, but corresponds in every
other particular with the Scripture narrative.
A short time after our visit to this place we
rode out to another interesting locality , seldom
visited by travellers, yet identified with the
Nephtoah of the Bible, though pronounced by
the Arabs Liftah . It is a copious fountain
situated about two miles from Jerusalem , so
cool, shady, and inviting, in every respect,
that the Anglican Bishop has selected a hill in
its immediate vicinity, for his camping-ground
during the summer. Soon after seating myself
to take a sketch of the place, long lines
of well armed Arabs were seen descending the
hills, causing us some doubt and perplexity as
to the meaning of the visit, not unmixed with
fear at the approach of such a formidable train .
We endeavored however to converse with them
in an unfaltering tone, and preserve a careless
air ; for nothing is more important among the
164 HADJI IN SYRIA.
Arabs than an outward show of bravery, whatever
be the misgivings within. Many were
the suspicious glances directed toward us, but
on learning that the Frank gentleman was a
Hakeem, their manner changed, and many of
them eagerly gathered around him to have
their pulses felt and tongues examined ; and
seemed delighted to hear that he would give
them medicine, if they would come to his
"hackme" in the city . I noticed that every
one paid great respect to a stately but scowling
chieftain, who sat under a tree surrounded by
attendants with folded arms and heads bowed
down ; but we could not ascertain his name.
Deeming it unsafe to remain longer among this
wild terror-inspiring tribe , we gladly took our
departure with an unfinished sketch ; and when
safely mounted on my donkey, I did not once
venture to look behind lest I should see them
in close pursuit. A deputation of peacemakers,
despatched by the Pacha of Damascus, had just
arrived , and it is probable that we owed our
EXCURSIONS TO WADY FARAH AND LIFTдH . 165
escape in no small measure to that fortunate
circumstance. The next day we were told,
by one of the party who came in for medical
advice, that the chieftain was no less a personage
than Abu Gosh, the celebrated robber and
murderer. He had conducted his forces thither
for the purpose of having a pitched battle the
following day with the tribe of Leham , -the
two tribes having long been at enmity with
each other ; and we were warned for " Allah's "
sake never to venture again so far from the
walls during those troublous times . The neighboring
country was convulsed with petty wars ,
and murders were an every-day occurrencea
Turkish officer even , having been openly
robbed and murdered , within sight and range
of the battery of the citadel .