
CHAPTER XX.
FRUITS OF PALESTINE.
"Blossoms , and fruits, and flowers, together rise,
And the whole year in gay confusion lies ."
THE country around Jerusalem affords a
great diversity of climate and soil , and therefore
many varieties of fruits . Immediately around
the city, hoarfrosts, if known at all, are very
slight, and touch but lightly either fruits or
vegetables ; and water seldom freezes even in
midwinter. During the summer, cool breezes
are enjoyed almost throughout the day, varied
occasionally by the hot, oppressive sirocco,
which blows from the parched sands of the
desert. Such is the mildness of the winter,
(285)
286 HADJI IN SYRIA.
that oranges, dates, figs , pomegranates, lemons,
apricots, almonds, and grapes grow throughout
the season, requiring no protection whatever.
A curious anecdote is connected with a plant
peculiarly Oriental - the mandrake . The fragrance
of its berries tempted a Scotch sojourner
in the Holy City, to try it as an edible . The
root was subjected to a long process of boiling,
stewing, and frying, and then our prying friend
proceeded to satisfy his curiosity and appetite,
little imagining its wondrous effects. The
night of the experiment was passed in the
agony of fear and frightful dreams . On awaking
in the morning, he fancied he was surrounded
by snakes ; and conceiving his watch
chain to be a venomous reptile, he actually bit
the precious metal in pieces . Every straw,
string, and thread he imagined were reptiles,
and dropped them in alcohol for preservation .
The tables and chairs , which he conceived to
be robbers, were found broken into fragments .
FRUITS OF PALESTINE. 287
He presented a most hideous spectacle , being
sadly bruised and battered in his struggles with
the supposed robbers ; and his eyes had a
most unearthly appearance from the peculiar
effects of the plant. His physicians did not
readily succeed in curing him ; and I dare say
our unfortunate friend will not soon forget his .
adventure . It is an ascertained fact that no
snake can approach this plant with impunity.
It is doubtless on account of such remarkable
properties that the Arabs term it Tufah- el-
Shatan-" Apples of Satan ."
A little beyond Bethlehem are the Gardens
of Solomon, so beautifully alluded to in the
Canticles. In this lovely spot, the most capricious
taste could not complain, so varied and
luscious are its fruits. The gardens are enclosed
by steep and rugged mountains, whose
sides abound in apricots, peaches , oranges ,
lemons, pomegranates, grapes, and figs . In all
the flora of Syria, I know of no plant more
curious (unless, indeed , the " resurrection flow288
HADJI IN SYRIA.
er" be so esteemed) than a quite weed-like
plant abounding here, which bears no less
than five or six different kinds of flowers .
And this valley has been made more attractive
still by the improvements of a party of estimable
Americans, who left home and friends
.to cultivate the soil of Palestine, and benefit
the Jews, towards whom they very substantially
evince a burning zeal for their welfare.
But few palm trees remain, either in or
around Jerusalem, though in other Oriental
cities they are very abundant . And while
enjoying their shade, and meditating upon the
dispersion of the Jews, we are often reminded
of a stanza from the pen of an English poet :-
"More blest each palm that shades these plains
Than Israel's scattered race ;
For, taking root, it there remains
In solitary grace :
It cannot quit its place of birth ;
It will not live in other earth . "
Mount Olivet is planted with olive, fig,
FRUITS OF PALESTINE . 289
pomegranate, mulberry, and almond trees .
Olives are eaten either pickled or soaked in
olive oil. The most common dish of the Arabs,
is an earthen vessel of olives, and a loaf of
taboon bread, with which they seat themselves
under the shade of a tree, seeming to be perfectly
contented with their simple fare . Their
bread is always made flat and thin, and being
not unlike leather in respect to toughness and
pliability, they easily mould it into the shape
of a spoon, with which they dip up the olives,
rice, or whatever they may be eating . Their
hands , however, are used quite as often as the
spoon of taboon bread, and thought to be much
the more convenient of the two.
So abundant are oranges and lemons, that
twenty oranges can be bought for a piastre,
* I may be allowed to mention , for the benefit of whom it
may concern, a fact I learned of the Arabs, when I had one
day accidentally stained my dress with mulberry juice, —that
is, that the leaf if bruised on the stain will effectually remove
it.
25
290 HADJI IN SYRIA.
and thirty lemons for the same small sum .
Citrons abound in almost as great profusion .
The karub tree is sometimes to be met with,
the pods of which are said to have been the
food of the prodigal son . The word " husk" used
in the New Testament, correctly translated ,
would be " little horn , " which exactly coincides
in shape with these pods. It is still used in
some parts of the world for feeding swine , but
in Syria it is in great requisition with the
poorer class, who use it as their daily food .
The cactus or prickly pear grows to an immense
size , and bears a most palatable, juicy
fruit . It is also formed into hedges for vineyards,
gardens, and paths ; perhaps it was to
the latter that the Saviour referred in the parable
of the supper : " Go out into the highways
and hedges, and compel them to come in ."
We may also infer that this secure and thorny
hedge is referred to in Mark-" A certain man
planted a vineyard , and set an hedge about
it."
FRUITS OF PALESTINE . 291
In addition to the fruits already mentioned ,
pears and bananas are raised . Grapes are in
season during five months of the year, and are
converted into unadulterated wine by the Jews
and Christians, and raisins by the Mohammedans,
wine being forbidden them by their temperate
prophet . Indeed , the Syrian climate
produces almost every variety of fruit, grain,
and vegetables to be found in our western
soil , the American colonists having eminently
succeeded in the cultivation of every article
introduced by them except the apple.
If we visit the market in October, the streets
will be found lined with baskets of olives,
grapes, pistachio nuts, radishes, lettuce, and
other vegetables of rapid growth. In November,
the olives and grapes being scarce, they
bring dates instead . The juice of the grapes
converted into molasses, called by them " dibis ."
Grapes are also converted into raisins, which,
together with figs , are placed in the still for the
formation of arrack, the Oriental alcohol . In
is
292 HADJI IN SYRIA.
December, when the country no longer wears
a barren aspect, but is covered with richest
verdure, cabbages, cauliflowers, radishes, lettuce,
and lentiles are brought to the city. After
January, corn is no longer brought to market ;
but we can well dispense with it now, for we
have in Syria three crops a year . This is the
month in which the almond, apricot, peach,
and plum trees are clothed with their rich and
fragrant blossoms . Oranges, lemons, citrons,
and limes are brought in great abundance. In
February the bazaars are lined with flowers,
hyacinths, daffodils, tulips, ranunculuses, lilies,
narcissus, geraniums, scarlet poppies, anemones,
and daisies. Most of the vegetables
and fruits already named are still in great
abundance, with the addition of onions, carrots,
and beets ; and in March, beans, sage, thyme,
and mint are added ; and now the pear, black
thorn, fig, palm, and apple trees bloom , while
orange and lemon trees are still heavily laden
with fruit and flowers . To these may be added
FRUITS OF PALESTINE . 293
celery, parsley, and other herbs . In April,
vegetation being very abundant, the list becomes
longer : white mulberry, artichokes,
peas, beans, onions, cucumbers , lettuce, corn ,
the Arab potato, and a vegetable something
like the turnip, lavender, rosemary, and the
supposed rose of Sharon . In May, cucumbers,
tomatoes, onions, potatoes, corn, a small species
of apple, and late in the month, muskmelons ,
watermelons, cantelopes, walnuts, blackberries,
and the mulberry fig. In June there is an
abundance of cherries, figs , plums, damascenes,
quinces , olives, almonds, bananas, pomegranates,
plantains, grapes, egg-plant, licorice root, dandelion,
and henna . In July, peaches, grapes,
pears, nectarines, melons, plums, potatoes, eggplant,
prickly pear, Indian fig, pumpkins, dates ,
damascenes . In August a still greater variety
of fruits and vegetables are displayed ; but in
September there is a slight decrease . In this
month cotton and hemp rapidly mature, and
the Arab corn, doura, millet, and castor oil
25 *
294 HADJI IN SYRIA.
plant, which here grows to a tree ; the Egyptian
maize is also brought to market. But this
is by no means a complete list of the varieties
of fruits, vegetables , medicinal plants, and flowers
in the bazaars at different seasons of the
year. The variety is almost endless ; indeed ,
so abundant are vegetables, that but little meat
is consumed, both from choice and necessity ;
for the only animal food to be obtained, besides
fowls, is mutton and goat-meat.