CHAPTER XIV.
TURKISH BATH .
HAVING escaped the noisy bazaar, I was invited
by my kind companions, Turfendah and
her friends, to take dinner with them, and afterwards
repair to the bath. Oriental women
frequently spend the entire day at the bath ;
but from what I had heard and read of the
ordeal, I congratulated myself that such was
not the present plan .
On knocking at the gloomy gateway of
their home, we were speedily admitted by the
slaves ; and on entering the house , found a
very tempting dinner already laid out on several
diminutive tables, arranged around the
(For in this country you do not go to
the table ; but the table is brought to you .)
room .
(204)
TURKISH BATH . 205
Having concluded our repast of all manner of
curious little dishes , preparations were commenced
for the very important occupation of
the afternoon . Baskets were loaded with
oranges , lemons, coffee, coffee- pots, fingâns,
pipes, all the ingredients necessary for making
sherbet, hand mirrors , fresh, fair linen in quantities
, and perfumery . With these on their
arms, the slaves followed us to one of the finest
bathing establishments in the city. Having
paid the usual bucksheesh at the door of six
piastres, or thirty cents, I was conducted into a
large domed room where numbers of women
and children were engaged in robing themselves
for departure, having spent all the morning in
the intricate processes yet in reservation for us .
The temperature here was very cool ; the light
was admitted through the dome, and rugs were
laid in the alcoves around the room for our
accommodation .
Suspended on strings stretched from wall to
wall, quantities of linen were placed for the
18
206 HADJI IN SYRIA.
use of the bathers, while passing through the
different halls, making quite useless our precaution
of bringing a supply. The baskets
being emptied, the narghilehs were filled with
water from the fountain in the middle of the
room, and a small bronze furnace of coals
brought in, over which the coffee soon simmered
in unison with the playing of the water ;
and as the art of making coffee is a matter of
the highest importance in the East, and entirely
unlike our mode of preparation , it should
not be passed over in silence.
The grains, having been slightly roasted, are
pounded in a mortar ; adding a small quantity
of water, a vessel is filled which is kept constantly
simmering by the fire, in order that it
may be ready for visiters at all hours of the
day. The number of guests having been
ascertained, the servant who has especial charge
of this department of domestic affairs , selects
a boiler of suitable size, in which he puts a
proper proportion of pounded coffee . He adds
TURKISH BATH . 207
to this, not pure water, but the liquid coffee,
heated nearly to the boiling point . Having
remained a moment over the fire, it is placed
in small gilded and enamelled cups, with brazen,
or even silver holders, like our own eggcups
. These holders are sometimes very costly,
being made of gold, and set with precious
stones, despite the canon of the Koran . The
beverage is now ready for use , sugar and cream
not being thought of, nor the process of clarifying
; for the grounds or dregs are eagerly
swallowed, and considered quite indispensable .
In this way the aroma is preserved , which we
only partially retain by our double refining
process. The servant hands only one cup at a
time, and , on presenting it, places his hand on
his breast, and makes a profound salaam .
While the slave removes the pins from Turfendah's
turban, she alternately sips her coffee,
smokes her chibouque, and glances with surprise
at the expertness of the Frank lady in
unlinking hooks and eyes, which to her are the
208 HADJI IN SYRIA.
most mysterious things imaginable . The last
sip of coffee taken, we were wrapped in sheets ,
and supplied with clogs , on which we clattered
over the wet marble floor to the next hall.
Here the temperature was warmer than that
we had just left, but not uncomfortably so ;
and the water that was dashed on me being
also pleasantly heated , the fears with which I
had been inspired by accounts of the dreaded
ordeal began to vanish ; and I entertained the
most friendly feelings towards the marble
bathing tub, with the water gently flowing
over me from an aperture in the wall. We
passed through a third hall of an increased
warmth of temperature into a fourth , which
was filled with a dense vapor of suffocating
heat.
Never did I long so intensely for a breath
of fresh air, to which I resolved ever after to
give due appreciation . In a little while , however,
by dint of inward Medo- Persian resolves,
I was enabled to brave my fate with better
TURKISH BATH . 209
nerve, and even to enjoy the ludicrous scene.
around me. A dozen attendants were engaged
in pouring hot water on the crouching figures
of women and girls of every age. And now I
trembled as I saw one of the dreaded spectres
approach me with a vessel holding a gallon of
smoking hot water, with which, before I could
make the least remonstrance, I was completely
deluged .
In
An observant tourist has given this process
the very appropriate name of parboiling ; and
up to the moment of actual trial, I had imagined
it to be an exaggeration ; but while realizing
the terrors of the word myself, from
sheer justice I withdrew the accusation .
vain was I urged to consent to a repetition of
the operation . Finding me to be an unyielding
subject, my torturer covered me from head
to foot with soap- suds, and put in full operation
her horse- hair glove ; and surely she imagined
herself scrubbing the floor, rather than a human
being ; or perhaps she had been an em-
18 *
210 HADJI IN SYRIA.
ployee in the inquisition, and there learned to
practise this unmerciful treatment with such
consummate art . The second time I tremblingly
beheld the approach of my torturer
with a vessel of water ; but this time I frantically
dipped my finger in the water, and finding
its temperature to be a decided improvement
on the first, I yielded a reluctant consent .
Bundles of the fibre of the palm were next
brought into requisition , which, being soft , and
gently applied, was a most agreeable substitute
for the coarse glove of camel's hair. Those
around me were now submitting to the jointcracking,
limb-stretching, body-breaking processes
; but I assured them I was perfectly
content with the skill already displayed, and
the pain already endured, and resisted every
entreaty with resolute firmness . I gladly remained
a silent observer ; and, on its conclusion,
joyfully resumed my sheet, and followed
the spectral train to the hall we had converted
into a dressing-room, where sherbet, coffee,
TURKISH BATH . 211
pipes, and goblets of the most delicious lemonade
awaited us. Some were regaling themselves
with olives, pistachio nuts, and watermelon
seeds . Of the latter article they are
very fond ; and during the season of watermelons
they carefully gather the seed , and dry
and salt them for future use.
During the bath, slaves had busied themselves
in making preparations for dyeing the
hands of their mistresses with henna. A vessel
of melted wax, rosin, and other ingredients
unknown to me, was at hand, with which, by
means of a steel wire resembling a knittingneedle,
the slave traced the outlines of flowers
and all kinds of curious figures on the outstretched
hand of her mistress . The spaces
between the figures were then filled up with
this softened mixture, and, after allowing it to
cool and become hardened , a large lump of
henna made into dough was pasted over her
hand, and the whole bound up, mummy-like,
212 HADJI IN SYRIA.
with several thicknesses of linen. The poor
creature must allow her hands to remain in
this helpless state a day and night ; but no
doubt feels amply rewarded for her pains on
beholding the delicate orange-brown tracery on
removing the dough, wax, and bandages . The
feet are dyed in the same manner ; and in
summer , great pride is felt in the display of
these unique slippers. The skin seldom retains
the dye more than a month ; but so indispensable
a requisite to beauty is it esteemed by an
Oriental woman, that she no sooner perceives
the fading of this important addition to her
charms, than the process is repeated ; and she
is thus never without this ingenious substitute
for gloves-an article of attire they had never
seen until their acquaintance with me- and
great was their delight when I one day presented
them with several pairs I had fashioned
out of a piece of black lace .
As may be imagined, the whole afternoon
TURKISH BATH . 213
had now passed ; and very serious thoughts
were entertained, and soon put into execution,
of taking our departure ; and indeed the shades
of night were already gathering around us
before we reached our homes.