
CHAPTER XVII.
THE MOHAMMEDANS.
"Jerusalem , Jerusalem,
Thy cross is on thee now !
An iron yoke is on thy neck,
And blood is on thy brow ;
Thy golden crown, the crown of truth,
Thou didst reject as dross,
And now thy cross is on thee laid-
The Crescent is thy Cross !"
NOWHERE on the wide globe do we find religion
manifested in so many forms, and to such
a degree, as in Jerusalem. Not a pure
and
undefiled religion which consists in visiting
the fatherless and widow, and living the holy
and humble life pointed out and exhibited by
our Divine Master, but that of which form,
bigotry, and parade are the chief character
(234)
THE MOHAMMEDANS . 235
istics.
Look at that haughty Turk, as he
fingers his beads and treads the silent bazaar
with a step so proud and stately, reminding
one of the self-satisfied Pharisee in the parable !
He thinks, forsooth, because he has just prostrated
himself again and again on the marble
floor of yon gorgeous mosque, in adoration of
the false Prophet, that the gates of Paradise
are already opened wide for his entrance . Yet
this same son of delusion , shrinks not from the
commission of every imaginable sin , each of
which he esteems as nought, so long as he
strictly observes the feasts, fasts , and ceremonies
of his creed . He finds the lax principles
of the Koran, and the pleasure of his pipe ,
unfailing panaceas for any qualms of conscience
that may arise - if conscience he has ; but of
this one is constrained to believe that these
benighted creatures are entirely bereft . Should
he , in his dealings with a Jew, cheat him of his
last para, spit upon and curse him, he imagines
it is all quite proper, and even praise236
HADJI IN SYRIA .
worthy. He takes delight in buffeting him,
and counts it his chiefest pleasure to do him
all manner of harm. And not only so, but
teaches his children and children's children to
treat every son of Israel as they would the dogs
that infest the streets, knowing full well that
the downtrodden Jew cannot resist their bitter
persecutions ; for the Turks are the despots of
the land, and to their iron rod the fallen race
of Israel must submit. But should this devotee
of Islamism fail to wash his hands before praying,
or neglect to fall down and call upon the
false prophet five times a day, he would consider
himself guilty of grievous sins, so implicit
is his reliance upon form alone . They
have no bells, nor will they permit the
Christians the general use of them. The cry
of the muezzim, which calls them to prayers,
is their substitute ; and wherever they may
chance to be, or whatever their engagements,
they instantly obey the summons, and perform
THE MOHAMMEDANS. 237
numberless kneelings, bowings , prostrations ,
and unmeaning gesticulations .
The greatest of their ceremonials is Rhamadan—
a fast of twenty- nine days ; but while all
food is abstained from during the day, each
night is spent in riotous feasting and carousing .
Much parade is made , for they are determined
their religion shall not be " hid under a bushel ."
Seven deafening salutes come booming twice a
day from the battery on the heights of the
Hippic tower, and the loud wailing cries of the
muezzim are heard day and night from every
minaret in the city. The feast of Biram, which
immediately follows these observances , continues
three days, and is considered by the
people as a time of great rejoicing.
The Derwishes who are selected for the office
of muezzim, are always chosen from the blind,
if practicable. This precaution is taken in
order to prevent them from seeing the women
who may be walking unveiled in their gardens
below, or seated on the house-tops .
238 HADJI IN SYRIA.
Another prominent ceremonial is their yearly
pilgrimage to the Tomb of Moses, which they
pretend to have discovered on this side of
Jordan, notwithstanding the declaration that
his burial-place is on the other side, and " is
not known to this day." The pilgrims form
an immense cavalcade, and having with difficulty
made their way through the narrow
streets of Jerusalem , a halt is made outside St.
Stephen's Gate, and a most cruel ceremony
practised before the eyes of the admiring multitude.
A splendid charger, with gay trappings,
is brought forward, and mounted by some
church or civil dignitary, who rides over the
bodies of any of the " Faithful" who may possess
the requisite zeal to prostrate themselves ,
and submit to the terrible ordeal ; and many
are so infatuated as joyfully to endure the test.
Methinks, with every reader of these incidents
of error, superstition, and ignorance, the
following question will arise :-If these poor
creatures are so strict in the performance of
THE MOHAMMEDANS . 239
these onerous rites, thereby risking even life
itself, should not we, who are enlightened
Christians, feel constrained to observe with
tenfold greater zeal the just and righteous commands
of the meek and lowly Jesus ?
The Mohammedan citizens of Jerusalem reside
on Bezetha in great numbers, and their
Derwishes occupy cloisters within the enclosure
of the Mosque of Omar. Their mosques are
generally devoid of ornament, having only
quotations from the Koran inscribed upon the
walls and doors ; but all are provided with
cisterns for the performance of their ablutions,
and a niche in the wall indicating the
direction of Mecca, toward which they always
turn their faces when engaged in prayer.
During their services some of the Derwishes
convert themselves into so many tops, incessantly
whirling and spinning round and round,
until one is expecting every moment to see
them drop from dizziness .
With the Mohammedans, the shaving of the
240 HADJI IN SYRIA.
head is never neglected ; leaving only a small
tuft of hair by which they believe Mohammed
will elevate them bodily to heaven on the resurrection
day.
Such is the absurdity of some of their practices,
that a Turk thinks it a great sacrilege to
sneeze without audibly thanking Heaven that
Shatan (the devil ) did not seize so excellent
an opportunity of jumping down his throat.
They almost universally allow their beards
grow, and such is the importance attached
to this appendage, that the common compliment
of the day is, " May your beard attain a
great length !"
to
Infidels and skeptics, in attacking Christianity,
have endeavored to place Mohammedanism
upon the same level, and attach to it the same
importance . To succeed in this attempt, they
must elevate a false religion to the standard
of the holiest and purest faith the world has
ever known. In so doing, their object is to
degrade Christianity, and to place its author
THE MOHAMMEDANS . 241
by the side of Mohammed as the founder of a
sect.
The chief arguments of this class of opponents
to the Christian religion , are based upon
a supposed analogy between the character of
Christ and Mohammed, their prominent doctrines,
and the rapid dissemination of both
throughout the most civilized nations of the
earth ; which arguments, being a mixture of
truth and error, and having found a lodgement
in the unreflecting mind, are worthy of consideration
.
A glance at the life of this self- styled " Prophet
of God," may, perhaps, enable us to discover
this boasted analogy :
Mohammed was born at Mecca A. D. 569 .
His family was one of the most honorable in
Arabia : they were wealthy, learned , and occupied
a high and influential position in the government
of their country. Abu Taleb, his
uncle, was the President of Mecca, and was
High Priest to the idol of the Black Stone.
21
242 HADJI IN SYRIA.
His caravans to Syria were sometimes accompanied
by the young Arab, where he doubtless
heard the Gospel of Christ proclaimed, and became
familiar with its truths, for the reception
of which his mind had been prepared by the
story of Jesus, told him by his mother, who,
though the wife of Abdallah, was a reputed
Jewess .
At the age of twenty-five, Mohammed was
said to be the handsomest man of the tribe
Koreish ; and soon after married the rich and
noble widow Khadijah, thus obtaining abundant
means for the advancement of his ambitious
plans. His character was thoughtful and
austere ; his imagination ardent ; and his delight
was in religious meditation and lofty
reveries.
He commenced his career of reformation in
the attempt to define his own belief, and to
raise himself above the gross superstition of
his countrymen. In solitude and retirement
he pondered the lessons he had learned in
THE MOHAMMEDANS. 243
Syria, and remembered that the ancient people
of his mother were still expecting the promised
Messiah . Being possessed of too strong an
understanding to discover an emblem of divinity
in the idol of which his grandsire and uncle
were the high priests, his mind soared
" From nature up to nature's God,"
and discarded the national idolatry. By communion
with himself, he recognised the exist
ence of the Divinity as an eternal spirit , omnipotent
, omniscient, and incapable of being
represented by the idols of his people .
For fifteen years he devoted himself to the
contemplation of this sublime thought, and
meditated upon the scheme of his religion.
At length he declared to a few friends that
he had a mission to perform, and that he was
authorized by the Great God of the Universe
to be his Apostle, and as such to be instrumental
in the conversion of the world from idolatry
to the worship of the only true God .
His
244 HADJI IN SYRIA.
wife, his cousin Ali then only eleven years
old, his slave Zaid , and Abu Bekr, an opulent
citizen of Mecca, were his first converts. He
was soon exiled from Mecca, and leaving that
place with his little band of followers, he remained
in obscurity for three years . Meanwhile
his religion was gaining ground in other
parts of Arabia, particularly in the city of Medina,
which soon offered to receive him, and
afford him protection . He accepted their offer ;
and no sooner did he enter their city than its
citizens declared him to be their sovereign, and
the Prophet of God . From this moment, he
declared that his mission was to extend his
religion by the sword, to destroy the temples
of the infidels, to overthrow all idols, and to
pursue unbelievers to the ends of the earth.
" The sword," said he, " is the key of heaven
and of hell whoever falls fighting for Islam
shall receive the pardon of his sins."
The once retired anchorite now became a
conqueror. He headed his army in person,
THE MOHAMMEDANS. 245
and marched against Mecca. While en route
he won over the wily Bedawin, and ten thousand
Arabs joined his army. He entered Mecca,
where he established his seat of government
as a temporal prince, and ambassadors flocked
from every side to congratulate the new sovereign
; and from this time he became the ruling
prince of Arabia, having in three years subjugated
the entire country. During his reign of
six years, he sent out twenty-four military expeditions,
nine of which he commanded in person
. In 632, one hundred and fourteen thousand
Mussulmans marched under his banner,
upon which was inscribed their confession of
faith : " No God but God, and Mohammed is
his Prophet."
This remarkable man was the husband of
sixteen wives, although he allowed his followers
to have but four ; and was the father of
eight children, only one of whom lived to enjoy
his fatherly care. But how different from the
life of the meek and lowly Jesus, who had not
21 *
246 HADJI IN SYRIA.
where to lay his head ; who went about doing
good, healing the sick , giving sight to the blind,
and comfort to the distressed everywhere ! He
had no army to enforce his precepts ; no sword
but the sword of the Spirit, which was the
"Word of God ;" and was persecuted until his
crucified body was no longer susceptible of
pain. Though a despised Nazarene, his followers
wished to make him a king ; but, unlike
Mohammed, he declined , for his kingdom was
not of this world . Christ was born in a stable-
Mohammed in a palace . Christ died the death
of a felon- Mohammed that of a sovereign.
Having failed to discover the supposed analogy
in the lives and characters of the founders
of the two great religions of the world, let us
examine their doctrines, and see if they be
equally recommended by their intrinsic merits,
and whether they deserve to be classed in the
same category.
Mohammed did not attempt to introduce a
new religion, for that would have aroused the
THE MOHAMMEDANS . 247
prejudices of his countrymen . He professed
to restore the only true and primitive faith
which existed in the days of the Patriarchs
and Prophets from Adam to Christ. His
fundamental doctrine was the " Unity of God,"
which presented a broad foundation for a popular
and universal religion . He ordained five
many ablutions daily prayers, and enjoined
well suited to Oriental life . He instituted the
feast of Rhamadan, and the pilgrimage to
Mecca-where one prayer he declared to be
worth one hundred thousand prayers uttered
elsewhere . He decreed that every man should
distribute for charitable purposes the hundredth
part of his possessions . His laws were adapted
to the different circumstances of the people,
and he so changed his religion as to suit every
nation.
The Koran-of which Mohammed was the
author-treats of death, the resurrection , the
judgment, a future state of happiness and of
torment, in a manner which greatly affects the
248 HADJI IN SYRIA.
imagination. At the end of the world, the
righteous and the wicked must pass over al-
Sirat, or the Bridge of Judgment, " which is
as slender as the thread of a famished spider,
and as sharp as the edge of a sword, across
which the good are able to pass into Paradise,
but the wicked inevitably fall into the abyss of
hell-over which the bridge is suspended .
While in torment they are shod with shoes of
fire , obliged to drink filthy and scalding water,
and have about their necks seventy thousand
halters, each of which is held by seventy
thousand angels, who drag him through fires
and among poisonous serpents and dragons
with seven heads ." The Mussulman's place
of punishment is divided into seven departments
for different classes of delinquents ; the
first called Gehenna, designed for men who,
though they believe , are wicked ; from this
purgatory, however, after a certain period of
punishment for their sins, they are released
and rewarded for their faith ; the second, named
THE MOHAMMEDANS . 249
Padha, is for the Jews ; the third , al-Hotamah,
for Christians ; the fourth, al- Sair, for the
descendants of the wicked Saba, or Sabæans ;
fifth, for Magicians, or Persian Magi ; sixth ,
al-Jahim, for idolaters ; the last, and lowest,
al-Hawyer, for hypocrites.
Their future place of happiness is called
Jannat a garden -corresponding to the Greek
word Paradise . Its situation is above the
seventh Heaven , next under the throne of
God. To indicate the richness of the soil, they
say it is of the finest wheat flour, musk , and
saffron. It is watered, says the Koran , with
streams consisting of some delightful beverage ;
in some places with unchangeable milk, some
with clarified honey, and some with wine.
But the highest delight is to be derived from
the society of the Houris, or the beautiful girls
with black eyes, who are formed of musk, and
reside in the pavilions of hollow pearls, one of
which is sixty miles long. There are eight
gates to this Mohammedan Paradise , each of
250 HADJI IN SYRIA.
which leads to a different abode of happiness,
graduated according to the merits of the person
: the first or highest degree for the prophets
; the next for the doctors and teachers of
the word ; the next for the martyrs ; the rest
for different classes according as they deserve
to be blessed . The meanest inhabitant will
have an extravagant number of wives and servants,
and every dinner will be served up in
three hundred dishes of gold .
There are many striking passages in the
Mohammedan Scriptures, a few of which may
not be uninteresting :-
" Do not give way to avarice ; avarice is a
tree which the devil hath planted in Hell, and
whose branches spread over the earth . Whoever
seeketh to gather its fruit is entangled in
them and swept into the fire."
"Generosity is a tree planted in Heaven by
God, the Lord of the world ; its branches descend
to the earth ; man will climb up by it
into paradise."
THE MOHAMMEDANS. 251
" Alms that are given in faith , without ostentation
and in secret, extinguish the wrath of
God, and preserve from a violent death . They
quench sin as water quencheth the fire . They
shut the seventy gates of evil ."
"The Prophet hath said , -whosoever entereth
Mecca shall issue from it like the newly-born
child . The Lord looks down every night upon
the earth ; the first town that he seeth is
Mecca : those whom he seeth first are those
who kneel and pray. One hundred and twenty
mercies descend daily from Heaven on Mecca :
sixty for those who pray, forty for those who
fast, and twenty for the lookers-on . Hell shall
remove two hundred years' march, and Heaven
shall draw nigh two hundred years, to the man
who bears the heat of Mecca."
But enough of this. Let us turn to the sublime
truths of Christianity. How gladdening
to the heart, and refreshing to the soul of the
Christian, is the spirit which pervades the
252 HADJI IN SYRIA.
Bible, and how striking the contrast to every
mind !
Whatever of truth is found in Mohammedanism
existed already in Christianity ; and the
remaining doctrines of the Koran are as the
dark clouds which obscure the sun, and cast a
shade and gloom upon the earth . Mohammedanism
recognises the God of the Jew ; but so
far as Christ's claims to Divinity, and the existence
of the Holy Spirit, are concerned, it is
Unitarianism .
In the Mussulman's confession of faith,
" There is no God but God, and Mohammed is
his Prophet." Mohammed claimed a divine
mission, and enforced his title by the sword,
which was the most powerful logic of his religion-
but Christ, who claimed to be the Son
of God, established his claims by an exhibition
of divine power, in the performance of wellattested
miracles. He appealed not to the
credulity of the people , but said, " If ye believe
not me, believe me for my works' sake”—and
THE MOHAMMEDANS. 253
when John the Baptist sent his friends to see
if he were indeed the Christ , Jesus answered
not their questions, but told them to tell John
the things which they had seen, and the miracles
which he had performed in their presence .
Mohammed reluctantly submitted to the test
of miracles ; he knew too well the danger of
detection in founding a religion upon miracles,
which none but a God could perform .
Christ was the promised Messiah . His coming
had been foretold by the prophets of ancient
times. Mohammed admitted all this, and professed
to be an apostle sent of God. He taught
the people that their good works would procure
their salvation ; but our Saviour declared, " I
am the way, the truth, and the life-no man
cometh unto the Father but by me." The
religion of Christ was one of peace and goodwill
to men- that of Mohammed was one of
sensuality, pride, and war. While the religion
of both overturned idolatry, and established
the worship of the great God of the Universe,
22
254 HADJI IN SYRIA .
Christianity was one of purity and holiness,
while the other was one of superstition and
gross immoralities.
The analogy which we have been seeking is
found therefore only in their united opposition
to idol worship . That there is, however, a
great similarity in the rapid progress of both
over the earth, none will deny ; and the fact
that there are 178,000,000 Mohammedans and
268,000,000 Christians, of whom 68,000,000
only are Protestants, is of sufficient importance
to induce a careful inquiry into the method
adopted by the founders of each in the propagation
of their doctrines .
The policy which controlled the course of
Mohammed was admirably adapted to suit the
age, and the different nations in which his
religion was received . Among the Jews he
contended for the authority of the books of
Moses ; with the Christians he acknowledged
the divine mission of Christ, and the truth of
his gospel, and incorporated the revelations of
THE MOHAMMEDANS . 255
the Old and New Testament into his own teachings
. He conciliated the affections of the Arabs
by showing great indulgence to their prejudices ,
and adding the sanction of Heaven to many of
their ancient customs . We have now only to
follow him to the battle- field, where he made
thousands of converts, and to the Koran , in
which he promises Paradise to all believers, to
see how his religion made such wonderful and
rapid progress . The introduction of Christianity,
and the difficulties with which it contended
, and over which it finally triumphed ,
when compared with the success of Islamism,
exhibits a most striking contrast.
Christ had twelve apostles whom He commanded
to go into all the world and preach His
gospel to every creature. These were humble
men of a despised race, and , with one exception
, were ignorant and unacquainted with the
logic of the schools ; and the fact that they
preached a new religion was not the least impediment
in the way of their success. Yield256
HADJI IN SYRIA.
Its
ing to no other system or creed, they professed
to teach the only true religion . Had Christianity
been content to occupy a place among
other religions, without urging its claims to
stand alone, it might have been tolerated .
exclusiveness, however, was not the only novelty
of this new faith ; its character as a system
of doctrine, and a rule of life, became a
barrier in its way which human wisdom could
never overcome. The languages of Greece and
Rome scarcely afforded expressions by which
to explain anything holy, humble, and selfdenying,
without the coinage of new words for
the purpose . The necessity of a life of secret
prayer, of faith, and a heart animated with
charity and benevolence to all mankind ; and,
above all , a reliance upon the death and mediation
of one who had been crucified as a malefactor,-
for peace with God, were novelties and
doctrines which were not easily comprehended
by the warlike, bigoted , and self-righteous people
of that age. Consequently, all the influence
THE MOHAMMEDANS . 257
of every priesthood among Jews, Gentiles, and
Pagans, opposed its progress among their disciples.
These priests held the reins of public
opinion, and made a tremendous resistance to
this new religion . The authority of the magistrates
was arrayed in open hostility to the Gospel,
and the wisdom and pride of the heathen
philosophers were offended by its simple truths.
The Epicureans and Stoics scoffed at the teachings
of Christ. They met St. Paul with taunts
and sneers - calling him a babbler and " a setter
forth of strange gods ." When these doctrines
were taught, all nations were at peace, and the
minds of men were capable of giving each truth
a deliberate and a thorough investigation . It
was the Augustan age, in which the public
mind was turned towards philosophy, and
polite literature was highly cultivated . Every
man was a skeptic, and required a thorough
demonstration of every principle received . No
imposture could have remained undiscovered ,
and no religion, claiming to be founded on
22 *
258 HADJI IN SYRIA .
prophecy and miracle, could have survived the
critical examination to which it would have
been subjected, if it were not based upon Heaven-
sanctioned truth . The murder of the meek
and lowly Jesus was a great source of distress
and discouragement to his followers. Their
Leader had fallen, and many supposed that a
death-blow had been given to their cause ; and
the fact that He, who claimed to be God, and
to have power over death, had died in disgrace,
was a heavy misfortune to those who were
then obliged to labor alone under the bloodstained
banner of the cross.
The mode which they adopted was not calculated
to insure success . They made no compromise
with the habits and the corruptions of
men ; they sought not the aid of secular power,
and asked no favor from worldly influence, nor
did they regard wealth, learning, or rank—they
gloried in nothing save the Cross of Christ.
They were met everywhere by the fiercest
persecutions . From the death of Christ to the
THE MOHAMMEDANS . 259
fourth century of the Christian era , persecution
did not cease. Stephen was stoned. James
was slain with the sword . Peter and Paul
were scourged , imprisoned, and persecuted continually.
The ingenuity of man was exhausted
in the invention of tortures for the early Christians.
Some were sawn asunder- some given
to wild beasts, while others were crucified and
burned alive . Nations combined to crush out
the disciples of Christ, and all the powers of
earth and hell seemed bent on their utter extermination
. If Christianity had been an invention
of man, it must have utterly perished .
But how did it succeed ? In about six weeks
from the death of Christ, His disciples began
to preach, throwing their colors to the breeze
where persecution commenced - in Jerusalem .
Peter preached to the murderers of Christ, and
three thousand souls were added to the number
of Christians in one day. In a little time that
number was increased to five thousand ; and,
in less than three years, " churches were
260 HADJI IN SYRIA .
gathered throughout all Judea, Galilee, and
Samaria, and were multiplied ." In seven
years from the crucifixion of Christ, the Gospel
was preached to the Gentiles, and with
such success that churches were established in
Asia Minor, Greece, Africa, and even in Italy
and Rome. Tens of thousands united annually
with this infant church, until their number has
reached two hundred and sixty-eight millions.
This great success, in the face of so many difficulties,
stamps the Christian religion with the
seal of God.
Mohammed began his work among the rich
and great. Jesus commenced among the poor.
The first three years of Mohammed were consumed
in attaching to his cause thirteen of the
chief people of Mecca. During the three years
of Christ's ministry on earth, twelve obscure
Jews were his chosen followers. The apostles
of Mohammed attained to richers and honorsthe
command of armies and the government of
kingdoms . The apostles of Christ endured the
THE MOHAMMEDANS. 261
utmost poverty, scorn, and persecution , and all
but one died a violent death in the defence of
their Master's cause. The sixth century was
propitious to the cause of Mohammed, when
darkness and ignorance prevailed, and the
tribes of Arabia were at war. Christianity
arose in the Augustan age. The religion of
Mohammed was proclaimed in an inland town
of Arabia among barbarous people . The religion
of Christ was preached in the most splendid
city of an intelligent nation. In Arabia
there was no established religion, and the cause
of Mohammed was favored by the feuds and
quarrels among the tribes. He was politic and
conciliatory. Christ was bold and uncompromising.
Mohammed labored twelve years before
he had one convert outside the walls of
his native city, because he then relied upon
persuasion to gain his disciples . In half that
time, Christianity, which was also propagated
by persuasion, could number ten thousand converts
in Judea, Galilee, and Samaria . At the
262 HADJI IN SYRIA.
end of twelve years, Mohammed took the
sword -promised spoils to his soldiers, and the
fairest captives, and the most voluptuous paradise,
to the victorious army. Arabs joined his
standard for the sake of plunder. The idolater
had only to choose between death and conversion,
and Jews and Christians were allowed
to select either the Koran, the tribute , or the
sword. The success of Mohammed was that
of the politician and the warrior. The success
of Christ was that of a God .
The Mohammedan religion is a mixture of
Judaism, Christianity, and idolatry, embellished
with the fanciful imaginations of its
author. Christianity is a religion of purity
and love, which stands out in bold relief from
the dark background of that age of impiety
and sin-as a bright star shining forth from
the bosom of midnight ; and, when our world
shall be rolled away into the graveyard of the
universe, the Cross of Christ will be the emblazoned
tombstone upon which shall appear
the story of man's weakness and God's love.