
CHAPTER X.
VISIT TO THE MOSQUE OF OMAR.
I WAS as much surprised as delighted one
day on receiving a polite invitation , from some
of my Turkish friends, to assume their disguising
mantle, and accompany them to the
Mosque of Omar. I could hardly believe it
possible that I was about to enjoy the privi
lege of walking on the hallowed ground of the
Temple enclosure, of standing beneath its
mournful cypresses , and setting foot on the
site of the Holy of Holies itself ; nor did I
succeed in convincing myself that I was not
dreaming, until fully equipped in their curious
and most unmanageable costume . The transformation
was complete . Ten minutes before ,
in my simple American dress, and now rigged
(166)


VIEWOF HAREMES SHERIF FROM CHURCHOFST. ANNE.
MOSKOF OMAR.

VISIT TO THE MOSQUE OF OMAR. 167
out so perfectly à la Turk, that my own
mother would not have recognised me ! My
friends were greatly amused and delighted .
The slippers gave me the most trouble ; and I
was heartily laughed at whenever I attempted
to walk. The peculiar shuffling gait of oriental
women must be learned , as an additional
safeguard against detection ; and great was the
mirth I excited at every attempt to hobble
across the room , which the enormous size of
the slippers made it almost impossible to do.
How should I get along in the street ? was a
query that gave rise to many fears and misgivings
. The slippers I feared would certainly
drop off, and the veil I felt sure would smother
me ; for, besides being very thick, it was closely
wrapped round my face.
My costume consisted of full silk trousers , a
trailing robe whose ends were securely tucked
within my girdle, an embroidered vest, large
yellow morocco boots, and over them slippers
of the same material , turned up at the toes like
168
HADJI IN SYRIA .
a skate. A red fez cap was placed on my
head, and around it a gauze turban edged with
a fringe work of balls of gold . Over my
whole person a white sheet was thrown,
which required quite as much attention as
the slippers ; and although every precaution
was taken, and innumerable pins brought
into requisition for its security, it was not
until I had gone through a severe process of
drilling that I learnt rightly to manage my
ghostly outer garb. My veil, though thick,
was fortunately of such a texture that I could
dimly see those around me, though my own
features could not be distinguished. Next, I
was warned that a word would betray me, and
therefore I must preserve perfect silence, leaving
the talking to them. To give the greater
force to this injunction , they placed their forefingers
on their mouths, and remained mute
for some moments themselves, thus impressing
it by example as well as precept.
On descending the steps, new difficulties
VISIT TO THE MOSQUE OF OMAR . 169
awaited me in the way of keeping on my slippers
, which increased the merriment of my companions
tenfold, affording proof that these poor
creatures do know how to laugh - a fact hard
to be credited when we think of their lifetime
of slavish imprisonment ! At a short distance
there was a group of Effendis, and as I passed
them I had many misgivings about my unwieldy
wrappings ; but a close observance of
the directions I received before sallying forth,
enabled me to retain them, and the lordly
Turk was for once outwitted by the despised
" Infidel !" My prospects were brightening,
and I felt encouraged . At the gate we encountered
the jetty Nubians who guard the
Haram , and I shuddered as I glanced at their
fierce countenances and terror- inspiring clubs .
But I congratulated myself that they too were
quite unconscious of the concealment of an
"infidel dog" beneath the folds of one of those
white sheets , else I had met with perhaps
worse treatment than that awarded the English
15
170 HADJI IN SYRIA.
doctor a short time before . On venturing
barely within the precincts of the enclosure, to
visit a patient who occupied a house near one
of the gates, he was knocked down from his
horse by a score of these ferocious fellows,
dreadfully beaten, and for a length of time
was confined to his room from the wounds
inflicted by their nail-pierced clubs-indeed it
was nearly the occasion of his death .
Having passed them I breathed freely-that
is, as much so as my provoking veil would allow
me-and was again complacently congratulating
myself, when my inward boastings were
suddenly put to flight, by the consciousness
that I had lost a slipper ; and , in stooping to
replace it, my veil dropped, disclosing my face
to several acquaintances standing just in front
of us ! They would no doubt have recognised
me, had they not immediately turned their
backs-a custom always observed by the men
on meeting females, for fear of committing
the grievous sin of seeing a woman's face.
VISIT TO THE MOSQUE OF OMAR. 171
The non-observance of this act is thought
exceedingly rude ; and , fortunately for me, it
was on this occasion strictly adhered to .
Ascending a wide flight of stone steps, we
passed an elegant Saracenic portal, and gained
the marble-paved platform from the centre of
which rises the towering Mosque of Omar.
The sun was shining brightly on the variously
colored porcelain with which it is covered
in intricate patterns, and reflected all around
the rainbow hues of the fifty-six windows with
which it is pierced ; and the cypress trees
waved gracefully over the pretty little praying-
places scattered here and there on the
green grass. Indeed it seemed to me fairy
land , and I was reminded at every step of the
marvellous stories of the " Arabian Nights ' Entertainments
." The dome of the Mosque is
said to be the most symmetrical in the world ,
and the whole is thought to be unsurpassed in
grace and beauty.
The platform being considered very holy, we
172 HADJI IN SYRIA.
doffed our slippers, and gave them in charge to
an attendant slave ; a very ancient practice,
for we learn from the Old Testament that the
Jewish priests always removed their shoes on
entering the Temple, and never officiated except
in their bare feet ; and this practice was, on
one occasion, a direct command from Jehovah ;
for we are told that Moses was divinely warned
to put off his shoes on the miraculous appearance
of the burning bush . Such is the importance
still attached to this custom by eastern
nations, that they are struck with holy horror
and greatly incensed when the unscrupulous
traveller attempts to pollute their churches
and mosques with shod feet ; and on entering
places like this esteemed especially holy, a compliance
with the rule is absolutely required.
At this moment, hearing footsteps of persons
behind us, we turned in another direction
to avoid them, and strolled leisurely to the
Mosque of Aksa, passing an exquisite pulpit
and fountain of variegated marble . By the
VISIT TO THE MOSQUE OF OMAR . 173
pulpit is an elaborate urn, and overhanging it
a cluster of cypress , olive, and acacia trees,
forming a most enchanting little spot . I lingered
here, intent on gathering flowers as mementoes
of the place, until warned by a sudden
jerk at my sheet, of the approach of a Derwish
.
In El-Aksa, seeing no one near, I ventured to
raise my veil, in order to enjoy the luxury of
fresh air ; but it was no sooner raised than
pulled down again by my companion, accompanied
by the same significant pressure of her
forefinger on her lips . On looking up to discover
the cause of so unwelcome an intrusion
upon the comfort of my respiratory organs ,
whom should I see but the same old Derwish,
bearing an antique-shaped jug and bunch of
keys, indicative of his office, as keeper of the
holy places. This curious building is hardly
describable . The exterior presents very much
the appearance of a barn, with a dome at one
end, and a row of pillars and arches at the
15 *
174 HADJI IN SYRIA.
other ; while the interior is a jumbled composition
of arabesque and gilding, windows of
stained glass and wicker-work, and semicircular
arches. At the upper end is an elaborately
carved bronze pulpit, and portions of the floor
are tesselated in mosaic .
I noticed that the worshipping-place of the
men was covered with carpeting, while that of
the women was spread with tattered matting !
On leaving El- Aksa, we directed our steps to
" Sedna Esa, " the reputed cradle of our Saviour,
but it was unfortunately closed. Such a number
of women were around the Golden Gate
during the whole time we were in the enclosure,
that we did not dare to approach it, which
I very much regretted . But a spot of still
deeper interest was yet to be visited - the
world-renowned Mosque of Omar : and we now
directed our steps to one of its four entrances—
an ornamental portal, its roof supported with
slender Corinthian pillars. A " dim religious
light" pervaded the building, and such a deep
VISIT TO THE MOSQUE OF OMAR . 175
gloom the lofty dome, that it was scarcely possible
to distinguish its rich gilding and arabesque.
Just enough light penetrated the
windows to produce an indescribably soft , and
at the same time grand , effect.
It being an unusual thing for females (who,
in Mohammedan estimation , are no better than
brutes) to pollute with their presence so holy a
place, we were closely questioned by the keeper,
who luxuriated in a lazy attitude on the floor.
The reply he received seemed perfectly to
satisfy him, though unknown to me, being
uttered in too low a tone to reach any but his
own ear. He supplied us with a few tapers,
and we descended by a flight of stone steps
into the Cave of the Sakhrah , which it is supposed
occupies the site of the Holy of Holies .
Half way down the stairs is a colossal tongue,
sculptured in alto relievo on the rock, which
the " Faithful" devoutly kiss ; and in the floor
of the cave is a marble slab, which, on being
struck, yields a hollow sound, indicative of a
176 HADJI IN SYRIA .
large void below. The traditions connected
with these and other relics , such as the print
of the Prophet's foot, I need not repeat, so very
puerile are they. Over the Sakhrah hangs a
time- worn red and green satin canopy, the gift
of the Sultan .
It was not deemed safe to linger here more
than a quarter of an hour, as the mosque was
rapidly filling with the devout and faithful ;
yet it was with no little regret that I allowed
myself so short a time on the hallowed ground,
which I felt sure was once covered by the glorious
Temple. Impressed with this belief, I
imagined that every precious stone, imbedded
within these walls, might once have composed
part of the sacred structure .
Near the doorway through which we made
our exit is a beautiful lilliputian building—a
miniature of the mosque-marking the spot
said to have been occupied by Solomon, when
overseeing the erection of the Temple . Frolicking
upon its marble floor were scores of laugh
VISIT TO THE MOSQUE OF OMAR. 177
ing children. Scattered around are many light
and fantastic templets , but none so beautiful as
that appropriated by these children as their
playhouse. What a contrast between this fairy
scene and the dark filthy archways through
which we now groped our way on returning
home !
On reaching my own door, what was my
surprise on being saluted and welcomed in
Arabic-so completely metamorphosed was I
by my Turkish dress ! I was greatly amused ,
and determined to enjoy the joke, and retain
my incognito as long as possible . Accordingly,
I remained perfectly silent, and kept
every feature in strict abeyance. Coffee was
handed , which I sipped with gravity quite as
apropos as the Oriental posture I had taken
on the divan : and in this position I sat many
minutes before I was recognised by the occupants
of my own home , whose astonishment
was very great on hearing the English language
from such an unexpected source !