



CHAPTER XXI.
AN APPEAL IN BEHALF OF ORIENTAL FEMALES.
" Night wraps the realm where Jesus woke,
No guiding star the magi see ,
And heavy hangs oppression's yoke,
Where first the gospel said , ' Be free .'
999
JUSTLY as America is renowned for her liberal
principles as " the land of the free and the
home of the brave "-the great theatre of noble
and virtuous actions, and the very pavilion of
arts , science, and literature-it is yet more
justly celebrated as the arena on which woman
is allowed the freest exercise of all the func
tions of her exalted mission . It is but too evident,
however, that we do not either prize or
improve these rare privileges as we should.
And it has occurred to my mind that a few
295)
296
HADJI IN SYRIA .
words from one who has spent some years in
the East, under circumstances enabling her to
form a correct estimate of woman's character
and condition there, might not only excite in
them a deeper sense of gratitude to " Him who
hath made us to differ," but might also prompt
them to efforts for the amelioration of their
degraded state .
In no country is woman appreciated as she
is in blessed America-no, not in Albion's
favored isle, nor in " La Belle France," nor in
sunny Italy, nor in any place that it has been
my lot to visit, as in this happy land- Columbia
Felix !
Whatever I may say upon the condition of
Oriental females, relates to those inhabiting
the once favored land of Sarah and the Marys,
the land of Esther's people, and of Ruth's
choice, of Judith, and of Phebe . Nor shall I
speak of extreme cases, but give a fair representation
of the matter just as it is, for that
truly were enough to move a heart of adamant.


GROUP OF PEASANT WOMEN.

APPEAL IN BEHALF OF ORIENTAL FEMALES . 297
Travellers inform us that their condition is
still worse in a few other countries , but , if so ,
Heaven pity the poor creatures ! Crown of
creation, how thou art fallen, art fallen !
In no city on earth, perhaps, is woman found
in greater variety than in the " City of the
Great King." The fair ruby-lipped Circassian
and the sable daughter of Ham, the fur-clad
Russian and the semi-nude Bedawy of the
desert, the graceful Greek and the clumsy
Copt, the modest Armenian and the brazen
Fellahah, the haughty inmate of the hareem
and the oppressed Jewess, " from every nation
under heaven." But, however widely they all
may differ in blood , manners , customs, and appearance
; they all more or less resemble each
other in at least this common point- they are
the abject slaves of the " lords of creation ."
If then you would form a proper estimate of
the lot and condition of woman in her Oriental
phases, you need not go beyond the precincts
of Jerusalem . Do you see that white sheet
298 HADJI IN SYRIA.
and thick veil, enveloping something, whose
yellow boots suggest the idea that it may be a
piece of living humanity ? Shade of Eve, it is a
daughter of yours ! Reader, it is a sister of ours !
Those black slaves are sent to hold her in vile
surveillance . The lordly Effendi , the bigoted
church dignitary, the panoplied soldier, and the
proud civilian, all pass her without the slightest
salutation, though they well know from her
train that she is as respectable as a woman
can be in the East. Nay, her own brother
vouchsafes not the slightest token of recognition,
even averting his head as he passes ; and
were her own husband to condescend to exchange
a few words with her in public, he would
be considered not only as utterly disgraced , but
as having actually sinned . Cruel Turk, who
" Scorns the world,
And struts about with whiskers curled ,
Keeps a thousand wives under lock and key,
For nobody else but himself to see."
APPEAL IN BEHALF OF ORIENTAL FEMALES . 299
He says he has bought her, and will treat her
as he pleases ! But, probably you think that
domestic happiness within doors may somehow
or other compensate for the neglect with which
she is treated in public . Ah ! you have little
conception of woman's sad condition throughout
the Orient ! Never can you say of an
Oriental dwelling, as the poet has of an English
cottage-
"I knew by the smoke, that so gracefully curled
Above the tree tops, that a cottage was near,
And I said to myself if there's peace in this world ,
The soul that is humble might hope for it there ."
There is no peace in the hareem . And what
love can the monstrous tyrant have for one of
them when his modicum of affection is divided
amongst half a dozen or half a score, or a score
and a half of poor ignorant creatures ? What
heart-rending scenes is the sojourner in the East
continually compelled to witness, flowing from
the abominations of the hareem system ! Yet
300 HADJI IN SYRIA .
the instance cited is the very brightest picture
of Oriental female life which can be portrayed .
For these poor creatures' husband , if indeed
he can be called husband, whose conjugal affection
is divided amongst so many, or rather bestowed
upon none , is able to support his ample
household without requiring any labor at their
hands .
But how widely different is the case when
they are compelled to labor for their own support
and his ! Take another illustration thenone
from the lower walks of life . You see that
one-robed woman, with tattooed face and narrow
little bead-adorned veil, concealing nose,
mouth, and chin, while most of her person is
as much exposed as Grecian sculptor could desire
;-she truly has a hard lot . She is bringing
vegetables to market. She planted the
seed ; she worked the ground ; she gathered
the crop, and now she must make sale of them ,
or else what is to become of that little fellow
that rides astride her shoulder, and the babe
APPEAL IN BEHALF OF ORIENTAL FEMALES . 301
that swings in the knapsack that hangs on her
back ? For her brutal husband spends the
livelong day lounging in the idle group at the
gathering- place ooff tthhee vviillllaaggee.. Besides her
own heavy cargo, she drives the donkey before
her to the city, well loaded with the produce
of her own industry . But does she venture to
ride him back ? Not she ! "Twould cost her a
sound drubbing to do so . But you see her lord
and master seated upon him leisurely smoking
his pipe, while his help-meet carries two children
and a basket.
do
Ladies, sympathize with your sister, for you
borrow from her the present style of flowing
sleeve, which you admire so much ; but you
not " go the whole figure," for you will discard
in a few weeks more what has been worn in the
East for perhaps three thousand years. She
wears it three or four times the length of yours ,
and either ties it around her neck, or covers
her uncombed head with these useful appendages
, and they thus serve the quadruple pur- 26
302 HADJI IN SYRIA.
poses of sleeve, cape, bonnet, and handkerchief.
But alas , poor thing, while she may wear that
robe like-
"Beauties by Sir Peter Lelie,
Whose drapery hints you may admire them freely,"
suppose she were so unfortunate as to be caught
without that nose- and-mouth- hiding veil , —such
shameful immodesty would in all probability
call down, not only the bitterest ire of her
devoted husband , and the reproaches of the
neighborhood, but a sound drubbing besides .
In what durance vile are we bound, by custom
on the one hand , and impelled by fashion on
the other ! But query, -which is worse , to be
wedded to such a brute, or to fashion ? Who
can say which is the more tyrannical, arbitrary ,
and capricious ?
Now if such are the civil and social disabilities
of woman in the East, how much more the
mental and moral servitude under which she
groans and toils, despairs and dies ! Should we
APPEAL IN BEHALF OF ORIENTAL FEMALES . 303
not, henceforth, evince more gratitude to the
" Author and Giver of all good," than we ever
yet have done, for the distinguishing privileges
we enjoy in this western world ; and not only
so, but, in view of our great responsibility,
should we not give proof of our gratitude , by
extending relief to our less favored sisters in
Eastern climes ?
" Then aid with prayer that holy light
Which from eternal death can save,
And bid Christ's heralds speed their flight
Ere millions find a hopeless grave . "
THE END.
