
CHAPTER IV.
WALK AROUND THE WALLS.
" I tread where the Twelve in their wayfaring trod ;
I stand where they stood with the chosen of God-
Where his blessings were heard and his lessons were taught,
And the blind were restored and the healing was wrought ."
GLAD, again to escape the narrow lanes and
confined air of the city, we make our exit
through the Jaffa Gate, with difficulty edging
our way through a noisy crowd of soldiers and
Fellahin, and it may be, a caravan, trying to
effect an entrance into the city, this gate being
more constantly used than any of the others.
The soldiers who guard it are looked upon with
no little dread by the country people, upon
whom they lay a heavy tax for every basket
of vegetables, fruit, and fowls, brought into the
city. Outside, a lively scene usually presents
(81)
82 HADJI IN SYRIA .
itself. To the right are the café and customhouse,
patronized by crowds of Jews, Turks, and
Christians, engaged in smoking and gaming. To
the left, is the justly dreaded quarantine station ,
which is nothing more nor less than the deep
fosse of the fortifications of the city castle ; but,
inappropriate as it may seem, it is yet far more
seemly than its late location, which was in the
famous Grotto of Jeremiah, near the Damascus
Gate, beneath a Turkish cemetery ! Even yon
Egyptian pilgrim, who has just escaped its
" durance vile," must have suffered dreadfully
from the hot sun in such an oven.
Following the road to the Convent of the
Cross for a quarter of a mile , we reach the so
called Upper Pool of Gihon , affording a favorite
bathing-place for the residents of the city .
Around it are many lookers-on, vastly amused
with the aquatic feats of the bathers . Near it
are the vaults of the " Charnel House of the
Lion," filled with human skulls , thrown in, pellmell,
it is said , by Ibrahim Pacha . On some


EN ROGEL AND VALLEYOF JEHOSAPHAT.

WALK AROUND THE WALLS . 83
of them tufts of hair are left , for the purpose of
drawing them up into heaven. A little way
from the path is a wely or small white building
erected over the grave of a celebrated saint .
These are everywhere to be seen in the East ,
and bring to mind the whited sepulchres, to
which the Saviour compared the hypocrisy of
the Scribes and Pharisees . It has been facetiously
remarked , by a celebrated traveller in
Palestine, that wherever he went he saw these
monuments to dead Moslem saints " but
where," says he , " are the living ones ?"
A funeral procession may now be seen passing,
in the centre of which is a corpse , carried
on a litter by four men . The form of the
coffin is made to resemble, as nearly as possible,
that of a human being. It is covered with
drapery , and surmounted with the green turban
of the Osmanlis . Arab women with naked
busts , hair dishevelled and flowing over their
shoulders, and their faces and breasts bruised ,
precede the corpse . With arms thrown up into
84 HADJI IN SYRIA.
the air, they shriek and sing their doleful
These mourning women are
death- songs .
alluded to by Jeremiah, when he says :-
"Give ear, call the mourning women that they come,
And to the skilful , send that they come ;
Let them hasten and lift up the lamentation over us."
Next is a company of musicians , playing a
funeral dirge on the tom-tom. In front are
the veiled women, near relatives of the deceased,
who, after the burial, make daily visits
to the grave, to utter their piercing deathsongs,
and deposit a plate of sweetmeats on
the grave-stone, as a means of reconciling angels
to the wicked deeds committed during the lifetime
of the deceased . No remains of the food
being found next day, they believe it has
afforded a dainty morsel for offended angels ,
whereas it has been appropriated by famished
jackals or starving beggars . They carry this
extravagant funeral pomp to a still greater
WALK AROUND THE WALLS. 85
extent, by tearing out their hair, and throwing
dust on their heads.
Following this valley downward we observe ,
on the hill overhanging the lower " Pool of
Gihon," the veritable tree on which Judas is
said to have hung himself ! It stands on the
ruins of the house of Caiaphas, and its size
strikes one as rather diminutive, after a growth
of eighteen centuries ; we therefore look upon
it with rather an incredulous eye, albeit so
admirably adapted to the purpose by its gibbetlike
shape. Immediately above , overhanging
the deep gorge of the lower portion of the Hinnom
valley, is the field of Aceldama, whose earth
is said to consume the flesh of the bodies committed
to it in forty-eight hours ! A portion
of this hill is called the " Hill of Evil Council ,"
where Judas and the betrayers of our Lord
consulted as to the manner in which they
might take him. Many tombs are excavated
in the sides of the hill , some of very fine workmanship,
with painted ceilings and ornamental
8
86 HADJI IN SYRIA .
carvings. In one the furniture of a devout
pilgrim was found, who had gone there to do
penance and die . Near his skeleton (?) was a
can, supposed to have contained water, another
for oil perhaps , and other articles of this description,
besides numerous relics and pictures
of saints .
Squads of Turkish women may be seen
among the olive trees enjoying a " phantazeia,
" or pic-nic ; and the valley resounds with
their sharp quavering notes of joy, which are
very peculiar . They suddenly raise their
voices from the lowest monotone to the highest
imaginable pitch, and interrupt the sounds by
repeatedly throwing their hands against their
mouths .
At the end of the valley of the Tyropoeon is
the Pool of Siloam , with its five venerated
columns . These are thought by some to identify
this pool with the Bethesda of old , where
the " blind, halt, withered , and other impotent
folk" were healed of whatsoever disease they
WALK AROUND THE WALLS . 87
had, rather than that within the city. A little
higher up (in the valley of the " dark Kedron")
is the " Virgin's Fount"-a dark underground
pool, into which women are constantly descending
to fill their jugs and skin-bottles with its
cool transparent water, while some are engaged
in washing their clothes by the singular process
of pounding them with rounded stones .
A few paces below are the " Kings' Gardens,"
even now fit pleasure grounds for royalty, with
rich green foliage, and crimson and yellow fruit
of pomegranate and orange groves. Near by
(at the mouth of the Cheesemongers ' Valley) ,
standing on a heap of stones and rubbish, is
the tree on which Isaiah is said to have been
sawn asunder !—a venerable, decrepid old mulberry
tree, under whose refreshing shade lazy
Arabs spend a large portion of the year- day
and night.
Situated a short distance below, at the confluence
of the valleys of Hinnom and Kedron,
is the Well of Joab, affording an abundant sup88
HADJI IN SYRIA .
ply of living water during the whole year. At
the annual overflowing of the well, the inhabitants
of the city repair hither to have a picnic
on the green banks of the rushing stream.
They bring their culinary utensils, and either
pitch tents or place rugs where they lazily loll
and smoke their pipes.
Changing our course we proceed northward,
up the Valley of Jehosaphat, the former bed of
the brook where
"Kedron's slender rill,
That bathed His feet, as to His lowly work
Of mercy He went forth , still kept His name
Securely hoarded in its secret fount,
A precious pearl-drop ! "
On the western slope of the Hill of Scandal
is the sepulchral village of Silwan . Here excavations
that were originally intended for the
dead, are now appropriated by the living for
their dwelling-places . The manner of burying
the dead, to which reference is made throughout
the Bible, corresponds exactly with the
WALK AROUND THE WALLS . 89
sepulchres which are found in the East at the
present day. In these accounts we are told
they were " hewn out of a rock." Sarah was
buried in the cave of Machpelah . These sepulchres
exist everywhere ; the rocky sides of the
hills are full of such excavations, some of which
are so extensive , and chiselled with such care,
they are now converted into dwelling- places
of the living, as is the case with this village,
whose inhabitants live quite contentedly in the
dark, damp tombs of which it is almost entirely
composed .
We
pause, and
gaze
with
wonder
at the immense
stones
in the angle
of the Temple
wall ,
towering
above
. Jutting
from
this part
of the
wall, at an elevation
of sixty
or seventy
feet, is
the
traditional
seat of Mohammed
, to be occupied
by him on the final
day of reckoning
, when
he is to judge
the assembled
universe
in the
" Valley
of Decision
" below
. Every
Moslem
, in
virtue
of his true
faith
, will
walk
over
this
valley
on a slender
iron
wire , which
leads
him
* 8
90 HADJI IN SYRIA.
on the other side the gulf into Paradise. But
the "infidel" Jews and Christians are mercilessly
consigned to the world of punishment by
the fiat of his omnipotent will.
The valley is here spanned by a small bridge ;
and in the base of Olivet, on the other side of
the valley, are the legendary tombs of Zechariah,
Jehosaphat, and St. James, and the pillar
of Absalom. They are hewn out of the solid
rock, and the latter is surmounted with a tall
cupola of fantastic form . The devout pilgrim
of every creed always pelts this monument
with stones on passing it, accompanied by fearful
curses , to show his abhorrence of the sin of
filial disobedience of which Absalom affords
such a lamentable example. This is the
ground allotted to the Jews for the burial of
their dead. The tombs are nothing more than
unsculptured stones, laid flat on the ground,
with an occasional inscription in Hebrew. The
highest ambition of every Jew, of whatever
WALK AROUND THE WALLS . 91
clime, is a resting-place in this soil - hallowed
by associations so dear to his heart.
A hundred or two yards farther is the Garden
of Gethsemane, and close by, the subterranean
Church of the Virgin Mary, adorned with
lamps, flowers, and pictures, the usual furniture
of a Romish chapel . It is dark and damp,
and its worshippers go about like so many
spectres through its cavernous recesses, at the
heels of a priest, waving censer, and making
the sign of the cross before each dumb picture
and idolatrously revered relic .
Following the meanderings of the valley
some distance higher, through many gardens
and by many tombs , we decline to the left ,
and a short distance from the valley, reach the
Tombs of the Kings-a succession of sepulchres
with an elaborately carved entrance . In the
walls, recesses are cut for the reception of sarcophagi,
or stone coffins, and, in some of the
chambers, there are remains of these coffins
themselves, which once no doubt contained the

WALK AROUND THE WALLS. 83
of them tufts of hair are left , for the purpose of
drawing them up into heaven. A little way
from the path is a wely or small white building
erected over the grave of a celebrated saint .
These are everywhere to be seen in the East ,
and bring to mind the whited sepulchres, to
which the Saviour compared the hypocrisy of
the Scribes and Pharisees . It has been facetiously
remarked , by a celebrated traveller in
Palestine , that wherever he went he saw these
monuments to dead Moslem saints- " but
where," says he, " are the living ones ?"
A funeral procession may now be seen passing,
in the centre of which is a corpse , carried
on a litter by four men . The form of the
coffin is made to resemble, as nearly as possible
, that of a human being . It is covered with
drapery, and surmounted with the green turban
of the Osmanlis . Arab women with naked
busts, hair dishevelled and flowing over their
shoulders, and their faces and breasts bruised,
precede the corpse . With arms thrown up into
92 HADJI IN SYRIA.
bodies of royalty. Our exploration is not without
its physical discomforts, for the doorways
to these dark inner chambers are so low that
an entrance is only to be effected by the lowliest
of attitudes, and the ground is most uncomfortably
damp, if not actually muddy.
The rolling away of the stone, mentioned in
connection with the Saviour's resurrection , is
clearly explained by a discovery lately made at
the entrance of these tombs, where it is seen ,
from indications now exposed by late excavations
of the ground , that an arrangement of this
kind once existed . This interesting discovery
was lately made by my father, and great was
his delight when, with the help of a pickaxe ,
he removed an artificial floor of rubbish, and
beheld the exact counterpart of the door of
Christ's sepulchre . A small doorway is cut in
the wall, and, by an ingenious arrangement, a
thick stone disk fits over the door, and can be
rolled away at pleasure. And it is thus that
many passages of Scripture are explained by
WALK AROUND THE WALLS . 93
late exhumations in connection with the manners
and customs of the present inhabitants of
Syria . The most careless tourist cannot fail to
be constantly reminded that he is travelling in
the land of the Bible . As for the infidel, 'twere
strange indeed were he to retain aught of skepticism
after visiting this land that contains so
many convincing proofs of the truth of Revelation
.
Having almost completed the circuit of the
city, and passed over the most interesting
ground immediately around the walls, we pursue
the stony path leading to the Damascus
Gate. Before entering the city, however, we
visit the Cave of Jeremiah, lying immediately
in our way. This is a grotto in which the
lugubrious prophet is said to have lived, and to
which he retreated after the deportation of the
Jews by the Assyrians . On the side of the
steep street, leading from this gate, we encounter
a crowd of idlers surrounding a blind storyteller
seated on a rude divan of stones . Here
94 HADJI IN SYRIA .
he may be found at all hours of the day, and
the delighted countenances of his listeners
show how much they are amused with his
wonderful stories .
The gates of city walls were very important
structures before the invention of gunpowder,
when battering-rams and balista supplied the
place of cannon , and were generally constructed
after the manner of towers . Of such structures
we have an instance in the remains of this gate.
There is every reason to believe it is the gate
mentioned by Nehemiah as an " old gate" even
in his day ; and hence must be regarded as one
of the oldest pieces of architecture about the
Holy City —exceeded in antiquity only by the
remains of Solomon's Bridge and the Temple
wall . The cut opposite represents the tower
room adjoining the gate on the east, which
is in a better state of preservation than
that on the west. The upper portions of this
room are of comparatively modern construction-
the work probably either of the Saracens ,
WALK AROUND THE WALLS . 95
Turks, or Crusaders ; but the lower courses of
stones, which are quite colossal , undoubtedly
occupy the position in which they were placed
by the Jews, in the palmy days of the Holy
City, and afford an excellent specimen of
Jewish mural architecture . It contains, in the
wall of its western side , a hollow spiral stairway,
which is the only one ever discovered ;
and, as it serves to explain the " winding stairway"
of the Temple, which has never heretofore
been understood , it may be well to describe
it. It is constructed entirely in the substance
of the western wall of the room, which is very
thick . It is built around a square pillar, about
two feet in thickness, and contains room enough
for two or three persons to pass at a time. In
the foreground, near the two Greek Christians ,
is seen a stone slab which probably served as
a trap door above. The low entrance to the
stairway is seen on the left-being merely a
vacancy made by leaving out two rocks in the
two lower courses of masonry-the door to
96 HADJI IN SYRIA .
which was probably an immense rock of that
exact size, with which it could be easily blocked
up on occasion-in time of siege . This stairway
being constructed entirely in the thickness
of the wall, the " watchman on the walls
of Zion" could at any time descend into this
room unobserved.
How many palpitating hearts have quailed
and failed in this very room ! History records
more than thirty sieges that Jerusalem has
undergone, and often has it been captured , and
not unfrequently its mighty walls in part overthrown
.
How many famous kings and warriors have
passed the portals of this same " Old Gate !"
How many wise men and magistrates have sat
within it giving counsel and ministering justice
; and how many myriads of reverent youth
have here bowed the head to hoary age, as
they passed in and out ! But now the only
dignitary that passes it is the haughty Pacha :
it is guarded by the surly Turk, who neither
WALK AROUND THE WALLS . 97
gives nor receives counsel or justice ; and the
venerable elders of Israel , instead of homage,
receive only insult and injury at the hands of
the youth, either of Turks, Arabs, or Christians
!
This gate is at present called by the natives
Bab-el-Amûd, Gate of the Pillar, and Bab- es-
Sham, or Syria, of which Damascus is the capital
. Occupying, as it does, the lowest part of
the valley crossed by the wall where it was so
easily attacked, it was doubtless made one of
the strongest fortifications about Jerusalem .
It was no doubt in view of such cyclopean
structures as this, that the seer of Anathoth
so plaintively bemoaned the fate of the fallen
city, saying : " The kings of the earth , all the
inhabitants of the world, would not have believed
that the adversary and the enemy should
have entered into the gates of Jerusalem . ”
No one, in walking around the city walls ,
fails to notice the picturesque portion just opposite
Jeremiah's Cave , and near Damascus
9
98 HADJI IN SYRIA.
Gate . Built upon a bold and prominent rock ,
and towering high above other portions of the
walls, it is conspicuous from every point . Just
here is the entrance to a remarkable cave,
which has created much wonder and surmise.
On scrambling through the small hole leading
to the cave, my father and brothers (who were
the fortunate discoverers of the cave) found
themselves in a vast hall, with a vaulted roof,
supported by numbers of natural pillars. Their
visit was made under the protecting mantle of
night, in order to evade the eye of the jealous
Turk. Leaving the city about nightfall, they
secreted themselves near the walls, and waited
until long after they heard the closing of the
great iron-covered leaves of the Damascus Gate ,
before venturing on the exploration .
In their wanderings through the dark cavern ,
the light of their torches fell upon a human
skeleton. It lay in the bottom of a deep and
precipitous pit, making more awful the stillness
of the night , and adding tenfold to the fearfulWALK
AROUND THE WALLS . 99
ness of the scene . This was, perhaps, the
skeleton of an explorer, insufficiently supplied
with light ; and coming unconsciously upon
the verge of the pit, was, without a moment's
warning, precipitated headlong down the frightful
chasm . Fortunately for our more provident
explorers , they were well supplied with lights ,
enabling them to make a less sudden transit to
its rocky floor, where they possessed themselves
of the fractured skull , as an agreeable memento
of this very agreeable place !
Along the intricate passages, through the
vast white halls, they roamed the greater part
of the night- now seating themselves to rest
in a sub-grotto , which, anywhere else , and at
any other time, would be a most lovely
little retreat ; and now gazing with wonder at
the colossal pillars ; themselves and the flitting
bats being the sole living intruders upon the
solitude of this gloomy place .
Besides the white pile of human bones, there
were smaller heaps strewn about, which, upon
100 HADJI IN SYRIA.
examination, proved to be the skeletons of
animals brought in by jackals - the real proprietors
of the cave ; and here let me give
honor to whom honor is due . Our dog had
first attracted our attention to the cavern by
scenting a jackal at its mouth ; and to this
noblest of the canine race must really be
awarded the palm of discovery .
This, it is thought, is the quarry from which
the stone was hewn for the erection of the
Temple.
Heavy masses of rock hanging from the
ceiling accounted for a shock which we had
felt, while living just at the extremity of the
cave , which we mistook at the time for an
earthquake . One of these rocks had no doubt
fallen, causing the whole hill to shake and
tremble , as well as its affrighted inhabitants.
This mammoth cavern has not only troubled
the mind of the antiquary with theory and
speculation, but has inspired the poet, and
called forth the graphic lines here given from
WALK AROUND THE WALLS. 101
the
pen of the gifted author of the " Cave of
Machpelah," and other poems :-
ADDRESS TO THE TEMPLE-QUARRY OF SOLOMON.
I.
THOU ancient quarry, hidden from the sun
Since the proud day of princely Solomon !
Within thy awful depths there long had lain
In embryo, the temple's sacred fane ;-
Like the bright forms, the eye of genius sees
Robed in the marble of Praxiteles .
II.
I stand and look upon your dusty bed
In silent awe, with reverential head,
And see the marks , as of the recent line
In tracery clear, in all their freshness shine ;
As if the hand that drew them still was nigh ,
And suddenly had vanished from our eye—
Here fragments , pile on pile, promiscuous shown
The clippings bright from off the flinty stone .
And as I gaze, I wonder why they stay,
Nor hasten to the labors of the day ;
And people in my thoughts the busy throng
Delving the labyrinthine crypts among.
Perhaps through gloomy caverns now they creep,
Or some high festival they joyous keep ;
* James Challen.
9 *
102 HADJI IN SYRIA.
Or, while some distant king has come to view
Their vast designs ; they give him homage due.
III.
Ere the huge hammer struck your flinty walls,
Or busy workman thronged your ample halls ;
Or a rude block, was chiselled by their hands
To sink the base, on which the temple stands ;-
Here was Araunah's threshing floor ; the place
On which he lowly bowed his reverent face
To David ; when, the direful plague to stay,
The king to build an altar, vowed that day.
" Take it as thine , and let my chosen Lord
Fulfil his sacred purpose and his word ;
Nay," said the king, " it shall not hence be thought
I give to God, that which has cost me nought. "
And, like the " Friend of God, " he weighed the gold ,
And the last mite, the price in full he told.
IV.
Lo ! from thy bed I see a form arise
Sublime and beautiful ; as if the skies
Had sent their master builders to the earth ,
And by a word divine , had giv'n it birth !
Or like to him, who in the sepulchre
In after times, felt the deep mighty stir
Of the all-quickening Spirit, on that morn
In which our glorious hope of life was born .
WALK AROUND THE WALLS . 103
The deep foundations and the massive walls
Now sink ; then rise the ample halls,—
Pillar and arch and stately corridor,
Leading to distant chambers -floor on floor,
Until the glorious temple kiss'd the sky.
No sound of hammer heard-but rising silently.
V.
Ages have fled , the Syrian kings have swept
Down to the dust, where the brave warriors slept
Of Israel's tribes ; the leopard , hungry for his spoil,
Has fiercely trodden down her sacred soil ;
And the wild beasts , with eyes like men, have trod
Prophet and priest beneath the blushing sod .
Persian and Parthian , and the hated race
Of Moab and of Edom, fighting face to face ;
And the fierce Maccabees , with brother's blood
Have soaked its valleys with a crimson flood.
Roman, and Turk, and Christian , all have striven
To blot thy name, O, Zion , under heaven !
But vain their efforts , still a power unknown
Watches thy dust, where once the temple shone.
And here within this secret quarry lies
A symbol of thy fallen greatness ; and our eyes
Look on this giant frame, with hope and trust
And hear it speaking thus, from out the dust : -
"Long centuries have passed away,
Since in this crypt I slumbering lay ;
104 HADJI IN SYRIA.
Their onward tread I anxious heard ;
And oft in fear and doubt was stirred
When battling hosts and clashing arms
Spread ruin wide and mad alarms.
But never did my beating heart
Throb with such anguish , or did start
As at that fierce and maddening cry,
Of Crucify ! Crucify !'
When God's own Son was doomed to die .
My dusty limbs, like a wreck at sea,
Shook as if tossed on a shelving lee,
When I heard
The word
' My God ! O why
Hast thou forsaken me !' "
VI.
"The walls of my prison were rent and torn ,
And the mountain masses were upwards borne ;
And I deemed that the earth by tempests riven
Was wrecked by the threaten'd wrath of heaven.
The silence that followed was deep as the grave ,
As the gathering darkness, wave on wave
Fell on the Temple, the city, the land ,
And terror was spreading on every hand .
Then a fierce seething stroke from the o'erburdened cloud
Rent the vail of the Temple , at that " cry" long and loud !
The shades in the under-world startled with fear,
And deemed that the judgment- sign soon would appear ;
WALK AROUND THE WALLS . 105
And the saints who for ages in dust found repose ,
Awoke and came forth when the conq'ror arose,
And appeared in the city to many- then fled
To their silent retreats, 'mong the time-honored dead .
And here as I lay in my rock-girded prison,
I heard voices say, " Christ is risen-is risen !"
Gentle footsteps of women, then passing along
Through the old dusky streets and the by-paths among ;
They talk'd low and sadly, and feared to delay,
As they said, " Who for us will the stone roll away ?
With these spices we've bought to our Master we go,
For the dead, not the living, these symbols we show."
VII.
Clear and cold was the night ; on the murmuring streams
The morning star shed all the wealth of its gleams,
And the dew falling thick on the brow and the crest
Of the mail-covered soldier, now taking his rest.
Profound was the silence ; on the city it fell
Like the low-breathing pulses of ocean's vast swell ,
Rising gently, then falling, as if the old deep
Of its heavings was weary, and sinking to sleep .
When lo ! a keen light pierced the clefts in these walls,
Startling quickly the owl and the bat from its halls ;
And I knew it had come not from sun or from star,
But it came from a region still lovelier far.
As an earthquake, that shakes the deep mountain's stronghold ,
So I heard when the stone from the tomb was then rolled ,
106 HADJI IN SYRIA.
When the Saviour, who died to relieve all our woes,
Conquered death and the grave, and in triumph arose .
How I strove then to shiver the old rusty chains,
A captive long held in my dark prison pains !
Each bone struck its kindred ; and my dry-wither'd tongue
"Victory !" fain would have shouted-in raptures have sung.
Quivering joy shook this dust; and my meaningless eyes
In their wide starless sockets were struck with surprise.
But more feeble than infancy- heavy as night ,
Death still held me a prey to his marvellous might ;
But I thought then I heard, in the loftiest strains ,
Angel minstrels now singing those heaven-taught pæans :
" Christ the Lord has come to save,
And has risen from the grave ;
Death is conquered , heaven is won,
See, the glorious work is done.
To the realms of endless day
Now he shows to us the way ;
Men and angels join to sing
Christ th' anointed Lord and King.
Honor, majesty divine,
On thy head shall ever shine ;
And thy mitre and thy crown
Nations yet unborn shall own .
And the dead, both small and great,
Who in dust and ashes wait,
On the land and in the sea,
By their Ransom shall be free !"