
CHAPTER VIII.
BETHLEHEM.
CORSICA was the birthplace of Napoleon,
Eisleben of Luther, and Virginia of Washington
; but when these are forgotten , Bethlehem
will be remembered, and the multitude of holy
associations which come thronging in upon the
soul at the mention of that name, will never
cease to be cherished with reverential memories
in the inner sanctuary of the heart. France
still worships at the shrine of Bonaparte ; and
those nations who felt his power have not forgotten
that mighty man of war. Christendom
still throbs with the energy infused into its
sluggish heart by the courage and vigor of the
monk of Saxony ; and the civilized world has
not ceased to wonder at the glorious results
(146)


BETHLEHEM.

BETHLEHEM. 147
which followed the labors of the patriot soldier
and Christian statesman, whose remains are now
mingled with Mount Vernon's dust ; but the
world, and heaven , and hell, have been shaken
to the centre by the Babe born in a manger ;
and thou, oh Bethlehem ! art exalted above all
the earth , as the cradle of Divinity-the birthplace
of a God ! " Thou, Bethlehem
Ephrata,
though thou be little among the thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto
me that is to be ruler in Israel ; whose goings
forth have been from of old, from everlasting."
The road from Jerusalem to Bethlehem is
rough and stony, with the exception of the
Plain of Rephaim ; and there is scarcely any
cultivation to be seen, save the terraced hillsides
, which are planted with vineyards . But
the oriental traveller is accustomed to rough
roads, and rough roads only ; with a good horse,
or a fleet little donkey, the ride of six miles is
soon over- that is, in an hour and a halfwhich
is considered rapid travelling in a land
148 HADJI IN SYRIA.
where cars, steamboats, or wheeled vehicles of
any kind are unknown .
The town stands on a hill, and presents a
fine appearance from a distance ; but an entrance
soon convinces one that it is but little
better than other oriental towns . The Church
and Monastery, however, covering the Cave of
the Nativity, are very imposing , and the inte
rior contains much to boast of, among which is
a long double row of elegant Corinthian pillars .
The Cave of the Nativity is lighted by thirty
lamps , which burn night and day, blinding the
eye with their brilliancy ; which , together with
their reflection in the polished surfaces of the
marble walls , completely bewilder one on first
entering. The altars are continually wreathed
with fragrant, freshly gathered flowers, and a
silver star inserted in the floor, marks, it is
said, the exact spot of our Saviour's birth .
This may not be the true manger, as alleged,
but at any rate it cannot be very far off. We
will therefore satisfy ourselves with the belief
BETHLEHEM. 149
that we are at least near the spot over which
the star appeared, announcing the birth of the
Messiah. In rapid succession , its incidents
crowd upon the memory -the appearance of
the star to a company of shepherds watching
their flocks by night on these plains, and also
to the wise men who go to Bethlehem to worship
the babe, and pour out their offerings of
gold , frankincense, and myrrh ; the unavailing
efforts of Herod to destroy the child ; and the
flight of Mary and Joseph with their precious
charge into Egypt.
The shepherds saw the star, and knew its
meaning ; full of joy and wonder , they publish
abroad the glad tidings . With haste they go
to Bethlehem, leaving their flocks , as things of
no value , compared with the blissful sight
awaiting them. They are directed by the
angels ; and remembering the word of prophecy
in relation to the wonderful babe, they go to
Bethlehem . There they ask, " Where is he
that is born King of the Jews ?" On discover-
13 *
150 HADJI IN SYRIA .
ing the lowly place of his birth, they fall down
and worship him.
Herod is troubled at the startling account
of the birth of our Saviour, and seeks to kill
the child, but in vain . The tyrant sends wise
men to Bethlehem in search of the new-born
king. They look in vain for a princely abode ;
and great is their wonder on beholding the
group before them : Christ, in the manger,
Mary his mother, and Joseph her betrothed
husband, in garments becoming their humble
estate . But their adoration is not withheld,
notwithstanding the great disappointment in
their hopes and expectations . Wonderingly
they fall down and worship him, and humbly
present their costly offerings . Herod little
dreams that his evil machinations are to meet
with no success ; but so it had been ordained
of Divine Wisdom. The babe lives, notwithstanding
his wicked designs .
Before leaving Bethlehem, we visit the schoolroom
of the estimable and devoted Miss Wil
BETHLEHEM. 151
liams, and find her engaged in teaching a
group of bright-looking Arab children , who
progress rapidly under their experienced and
indefatigable teacher.
One of the most absurd of all the ceremonies
performed at the Church of the Nativity, is the
exorcism of evil spirits . Smile not, for it is
even so ! A high ecclesiastical dignitary of
the Church of Rome-no less a personage than
the Patriarch of Jerusalem- assisted by a long
retinue of Bishops and other clergy in full canonicals
, annually performs this solemn mockery
a few days before the Latin Christmas- for
you must know that they have two or three
Christmases at Bethlehem ! Some of our party
who witnessed this droll mummery were unable
to restrain their risibles at sight of the
curious and violent gesticulations of these
reverendissimos , when they would apparently
corner one of the demons and cast him out of
the church. But, though we had not intentionally
offended them, our want of faith in
152 HADJI IN SYRIA.
their exorcising powers well nigh cost us a
night's lodging in prison. Having never witnessed
the grand ceremonies of " Christi Missa,"
we visited Bethlehem one Friday evening for
the purpose of attending them. We repaired
to the Church of the Nativity at eight o'clock,
and remained seated for some time in perfect
silence, when the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem
approached us, and inquired, through a priest
who spoke imperfect English, whether we were
Catholics ? " Yes," was the reply, " we are
Bible Christians, and, of course, Catholics."
"And do you believe in the real presence ?"
continued the heretic-detector. " We believe
that the Divine Redeemer is everywhere present,"
said father, not being aware that the
question was asked with special reference to
the services upon which they were about to
engage . A long discussion ensued relative to
the " real presence ;" and when we informed
him that we were not Roman Catholics, he
insisted upon our immediate departure . On
BETHLEHEM . 153
observing a manifest reluctance on our part,
he terminated the conversation and shouted,
" Jeeb Kawass ;" which, being interpreted,
means " bring the janizaries ;" and forthwith
several subalterns hastened off to summon
them . Anxious to avoid all difficulties , we
retreated to the Church of St. Helena, owned
by the Armenians, where we were heartily
welcomed and assured of protection by sympathizing
friends who had witnessed our expulsion.
But we soon discovered that even here
we were kept under strict surveillance, and
continued our walk to the reputed sites of
Jerome's Cave, Joseph's house, and the manger.
Soon after descending into the Grotto of
the Nativity, we received a message from his
grace, who wished to visit the Star and the
Manger, and desired us to depart. Being fully
assured, however, that here at least we had a
right to remain as long as the church was open ,
we were slow to take our departure ; but on
refusing to kneel to the uplifted wafer, the
154 HADJI IN SYRIA.
officiating priest commanded our expulsion,
and raised the cry of " Brotestanti . " Forthwith
the vaulted archways rang with loud
cries of " Protestant ! Protestant ! Protestant !"
and in less time than is required to describe
the scene, we were forcibly expelled from the
premises.