CHAPTER II.
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM.
" It is a goodly sight to see
What Heaven hath done for this delicious land !
What fruits of fragrance blush on every tree !
What goodly prospects o'er the hills expand !
But man would mar them with an impious hand ."
WITH bounding spirits, and hopeful happy
hearts, we at last form the line of march, and
enter upon our journey, every preparation
having been made-horse, foot, and dragoontent
and canteen-goods and chattels, and all
the thousand and one items that Syrian travel
renders necessary for comfort and safety-the
entire cavalcade being led by a donkey but
little larger than a Newfoundland dog.
We take the seacoast route along the once
crowded track of Phoenician commerce : but,
(26)
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM . 27
alas ! how desolate is the present appearance
of the country, lying as it now does, under the
curse of Heaven !
We must stop an hour at noon and lunch in
a roadside khan, where we are but poorly
sheltered from the pattering rain which is falling
in torrents . These stopping-places are but
little better than the most ordinary stables in
our own favored country, being nothing more
than a stone house , or mud hut, with earthen
floors, bare walls, and unglazed windows. Such
is our present little caravanserai,—but Yuseph
promises us a night's lodging in the best khan
in all Syria. We, therefore, halt at the door
of the celebrated " Nebi-Yunas khan" (khan of
the Prophet Jonas) , in anxious expectation of
being fully repaid for the fatigue of our day's
journey by the comforts and luxuries very
naturally suggested by Yuseph's promise. But,
shade of Jonas ! what is our surprise, on entering
a room with floor uncovered either by carpet
or matting, without table, chair, or divan—sans
28 HADJI IN SYRIA.
everything-presenting, in the absence of a
single piece of furniture, anything but the air
of comfort we had been led to anticipate. It
is but sheer justice, however , to state that
although the door was no sufficient barrier
even against the prowling jackals that were
howling about, yet the windows were windows
that were wind-doors, admitting light, wind,
and birds , without let or hindrance . But what
care we for table or chair ? Hunger and a
long ride in the drenching rain suggest other
things , with which we resolve to be content.
Our wants, if not our anticipations, are fully
met in a pan of hot coals, and a frugal supper
furnished from the mysteries of the " canteen "
-an indispensable item of our caravan furniture,
inasmuch as it contains our provisions ,
and constitutes our locomotive kitchen . The
daughters of the land come in, and, in order to
have some pretext for extorting from us the
bucksheesh of a few piastres , dance before us
with all their might, our earnest entreaties to
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM. 29
the contrary notwithstanding. Mats and pieces
of baggage are now substituted for beds, and
fatigue secures for us that deep and refreshing
repose so little known to the pampered epicure .
At early dawn we rise to resume our journey ,
quite as willing, perhaps , to leave our Arab
khan as Jonah was to quit his fishy lodgingfor
it is here, as the monks will have it, that
the timid prophet was disembarked from aboard
the submarine whaler ! Our ride is now along
the coast of Phoenicia- the great line of trade
and travel in days of yore . Sidon , the city of
prophecy , is reached about midday, and, soon
after our entrance, we receive an official call from
Ibrahim Nukley, the polite and obliging consular
representative of the " stars and stripes."
He inquires very earnestly after the welfare of
our great American statesman , “ Sultan Cass,”
as he called him, who, some time since, made a
tour to the Holy Land, and impressed the people
very favorably.
The palaces of the merchant princes that
3 *
30 HADJI IN SYRIA.
once adorned the streets of Sidon have long
since been levelled to the dust, and her territory
despoiled by the Persian hordes that
invaded this ground in direct fulfilment of
prophecy. There is nothing now to be seen
of this sin-smitten city but a few fragments of
columns or archways, and other ruins lying
here and there in confused heaps. What a
striking instance of the visitation of Jehovah's
wrath is the downfall of this city that was
called, in the day of her power, the " mother
of commerce !" Among the most fearful of the
threats against Sidon is the following, recorded
by Ezekiel : " Thus saith the Lord ; behold, I
am against thee, O Zidon ; and I will be glorified
in the midst of thee : and they shall know that
I am the Lord, when I shall be sanctified in
her." Thus we now behold only a miserable
little Arab village, a few scattered ruins of
former grandeur, and a single schooner riding
at anchor in the harbor, as representatives of
the navy and city of Sidon. Luxuriant bananas,
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM . 31
and other semi-tropical fruits , abundantly testify
in behalf of this productive soil and genial
clime-" A delightsome land, saith the Lord of
Hosts ! " " The glory of all lands ."
Having fully surveyed the doomed city, we
again take up the line of march, and soon call
a halt at a picturesque fountain on the roadside,
where we are honored with the company
of a Turkish dignitary. Some of these fountain
structures, that are used as oratories, are
in very good preservation, and convey a good
idea of Saracenic architecture . Reluctantly
leaving this sweet place of repose, in due time
we reach Tyre, the next point of interest, another
devoted city of prophecy ; of which it is
said, “ Thou art situate at the entry of the sea
-a merchant of the people for many isles."
"The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in
thy market." " Thou wast perfect in thy ways
until iniquity was found in thee." Of the rigging
of her ships it is said, " Fine linen, and
broidered work from Egypt, was that which
32 HADJI IN SYRIA.
thou spreadest forth to be thy sail ;" and of
her beauty, " Thou hast said I am of perfect
beauty ;" but, because of her sins, " She was
cast, as profane, out of the mountain of God."
So signally has she fallen from the pinnacle of
her glory, down to the nadir of desolation, that
not a vestige now remains of her former magnificence
. How wonderful in our eyes is the
fulfilment of the most minute prediction uttered
against these ill-fated cities of the East !
It was predicted of Tyre, " I will make thee
like the top of a rock . Thou shalt be a place
to spread nets upon, for I, the Lord, have
spoken it, saith the Lord ." Accordingly, the
first objects that attract the attention of the
traveller are fishermen's nets spread on the
rocks ! Her destitute appearance extorts the
involuntary exclamation, " How art thou destroyed
that wast inhabited of seafaring menthe
renowned city which was strong in the
sea !" " Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity
was of ancient days ?"
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM. 33
Here was the capital of Hiram, who supplied
Solomon with the cedars of Lebanon for
the building of the " House of the forest of
Lebanon," and for navies and ships of trade as
well as for the magnificent temple . Tyre did
not always continue in her fallen state, for it
was written, " And it shall come to pass in
that day that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy
years, according to the years of one king ."
After the lapse of these seventy years she
once more became the " crowning city ," and
continued the occupation of trading until the
destructive siege of Alexander, foretold by
Ezekiel in these significant words, " They
shall lay thy stones, and thy timber, and thy
dust, in the midst of the water." From this
time the sceptre passed away from her for ever.
The American consular agent lost no time in
calling upon us, and , like the dignified functionary
of Sidon, tendered the hospitalities of
his mural domicil (for it is built upon the
wall) ; but we preferred the freedom of our
34 HADJI IN SYRIA.
hired lodgings - no mean establishment either
--for amongst other luxuries we had silk coverlets
. The floor was our bedstead , however,
and the beds simply a little cotton or wool
sewed up in a flat bag of sufficient dimensions
for the accommodation of one person . These
are all piled up the one on the other during
the day, and at night each person goes to the
general magazine and bears off his bed when
and where he lists . This , however, is the bed
of the upper circles . That of the common
people is still more portable, and easily arranged,
being made simply by lying down !
for the plebeian carries on his back throughout
the day " that whereon he lieth " at night ; and
thrice happy is the Arab who, in addition to
this large outer garment, can boast of a piece
of matting which he can interpose between
himself and the ground by way of mattress .
The consul's wife accompanied her lord, and
was evidently pleased at the glances of wonder
we bestowed on the lavish display of gold
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM. 35
and jewels covering her head and shoulders ;
her enormous head-dress hanging quite to her
girdle . She placed it on my head, but I could
scarcely hold myself erect a single minute ; and
well may it be so weighty, for it contained
several thousand dollars worth of jewels, besides
numberless gold and silver coins, pierced
and strung on her long hair, which hung, veillike,
over her back in a profusion of little
braids. DDiidd sshhee bbuutt possess the inner " ornament
of a meek and quiet spirit" at all proportionate
to her outer adornment, she would certainly
never disturb the quietude of the consulate
.
But few remains of Tyre can now be discerned
among the miserable collection of fishing-
huts, called by the Arabs " Sour." In a
walk along the beach, we gather some of the
beautiful shells from which the alchemists of
yore are supposed to have extracted the celebrated
Tyrian purple .
Leaving Tyre, we journey towards St. Jean
36 HADJI IN SYRIA.
d'Acre, the Akko of the Old Testament, and
the Ptolemais of the New, which can boast of
nothing more than its formidable- looking walls,
the houses being a mass of patched-up ruins,-
and the streets narrow and filthy. Its unprepossessing
appearance does not tempt us to
tarry longer within its walls than suffices to refresh
our wearied bodies ; so , cheerfully returning
the salaam of the soldiers who guard its
gate, we enter the plain of Esdraelon, celebrated
as the battle-ground of nations ; and a
most unfortunate one it was for the great soldier
of France, whose ambitious designs here
received a check from which le grand Empereur
never recovered . This part of the country,
and indeed nearly the whole of the ground
over which we have passed, is carpeted with
flowers of endless variety, far more brilliant,
in color and greater in size than the wild
flowers of our own land . I can no longer
suspect a lady traveller in this land , of
exaggeration, who speaks of having collected
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM . 37
a hundred distinctly different flowers during a
short walk.
Several of our most spirited horses having
engaged in a terrible fight, and one of them
being seriously injured, we are fearful of
delay. The proud steed struggles with what
may prove a fatal wound . But in an instant,
Yuseph puts spurs, or rather shovels (for such
they are) , to his spirited horse, and flying away
to a copse of shrubs, speedily returns with a
handful of leaves, which he reduces to a pulp,
and applies to the gaping wound . The blood
is staunched almost immediately, and now we
resume our journey, and are on the qui vive for
adventure or anything of interest.
66
'Hark, a sound in the valley ! where swollen and strong,
Thy river, O Kishon, is sweeping along ;
Where the Canaanite strove with Jehovah in vain ,
And thy torrent grew dark with the blood of the slain ."
Further on, we ford the deep and rapid current
of " that ancient river, the river Kishon ,"
4
38 HADJI IN SYRIA.
whose waters were once crimsoned with the
blood of four hundred false teachers , slain at
the command of the prophet of God. It was
on this very plain, too, that Deborah, that
good old mother in Israel, achieved such a
splendid victory over Sisera, the commander
of the army of Jabin, king of Canaan . And
here also was performed that courageous act of
another daring woman, which is thus commended
by the sacred writer : " Blessed among
women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite
be."
A well known traveller says he never saw
the process of pitching a tent without bringing
to mind the story of Jael and Sisera . To this
day the " nail and hammer" compose an important
part of household furniture . In the
erection of a tent these are indispensable . The
" nails" consist generally of mere wooden pegs ,
to which the cords of the tent are fastened .
These are again alluded to in one of the prophecies
relating to Jerusalem : " Thine eyes
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM . 39
shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation , a tabernacle
that shall not be taken down ; not one
of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed,
neither shall any of the cords thereof be
broken ."
The tents commonly used are gayly colored
and highly ornamental ; but those in which the
Bedawin encamp are black, the material being
the skins of black goats . We are thus enabled
to understand the following portion of Solomon's
Song: " I am black but comely, oh ye
daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar,
as the curtains of Solomon ." Some of these
black tents are now to be seen in the distance,
and vividly recall the passage.
The steep ascent of Mount Carmel is now
commenced on foot . Our road is nothing more
than a series of little holes worn in the rock
by the beasts of burden that constantly climb
the " ladder," laden with fruits and merchandise
. Our path is often on the edge of a precipice,
several hundred feet in height, almost
40 HADJI IN SYRIA.
overhanging the sea, and a single misstep would
hurl us below into the surging ocean.
Our horses with the greatest possible difficulty,
but with studied care, pursue the toilsome
ascent, and were they any other than
oriental horses , would stumble and fall at every
step. Fortunate indeed are we that they are
trained to this mode of travelling ! These
dangerous passes no doubt suggested the figure
found in several passages of Scripture , which
would not forcibly strike the mind of those
inhabiting a more level country . David prays
that his " enemies may not rejoice over him
when his foot slippeth ." Of the wicked , God
says, " To me belongeth vengeance and recompense
; their foot shall slide in due time."
How significant is this figure to those travelling
over these lofty summits, and along the
verge of these frightful precipices !
Situated on the top of the mountain is the
neat and elegant Convent of Elijah, affording
delightful entertainment for the wearied Hadji,
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM . 41
not a little enhanced by its extensive view of
the surrounding country. Its monastic occupants
are said to lead a most rigorous and
secluded life, wearing no sandals, and abstaining
from meat. A chapel is shown, and under
its altar a grotto, said to have been one of the
homes of Elijah . This, however, is one of
many caves with which the mountain abounds ;
any one of which, we have just as great reason
to select as the Tishbite's abode, as that pointed
out by tradition . Was it not to these very caves
that Amos referred when speaking of the
attempts of the wicked to escape their inevitable
doom, in these words : " Though they hide
themselves in the top of Carmel, Jehovah will
search and take them out thence" ? Notwithstanding
the long neglect of this region , the
soil is still very fertile, and agrees well with
the account of Isaiah, who speaks in such glowing
terms of the " excellency of Carmel." A
celebrated naturalist found here forty-seven
varieties of flowers, and says that a botanist
4 *
42 HADJI IN SYRIA.
might spend a year in this delightful retreat,
and every day add new specimens to his collection.
After a few hours ' recreation we very cordially
exchanged salaams and bucksheeshes
with the warm-hearted " Padre Charley ," who
very kindly presented me with a vial of fragrant
essence, and reluctantly bid adieu to this
delightful spot, so rich in its soul- stirring reminiscences
and associations . Descending the
mountain, we resume our line of march along
the seashore often , indeed, making a little
marine excursion amongst the waves that gently
lave the sandy beach .
Never did band of " hadjis" more joyously
wend their way over " Terra Santa," than did
our happy company of palmers on this occasion.
But here it behoves me, as a faithful journalist,
to record how low my pride was brought in a
single moment of misfortune , as we were passing
the ruins of Ahtlit-exemplifying in one
sense at least the declaration that " pride goeth
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM . 43
before destruction, and a haughty spirit before
a fall." The beautiful trim filly with which
I was provided, had often contested in races.
it would seem, as every well-favored horse
in that country is bound to do . She was
thought to be too fiery for me on commencing
our journey ; but, inasmuch as she was led by
a steady muleteer, it was deemed prudent to
confide me to her back . But pluming myself
not a little upon my rare equestrian tact, I
ventured to dismiss the muleteer after a day's
travel, supposing that I had gained the mastery
over her proud spirit. Queen Dido herself in
her girlish days perhaps never sat more elate
with self-satisfaction upon her saddle ( if saddle
they had in those days ! ) , as she rode up and
down this very shore, than did your self-confident
Hadji as she rode past the ruins of Ahtlit.
But alas for budding pride ! Yuseph, who had
lingered behind for some time, came flying past
me on his elegant sorrel charger, and in a
moment my ambitious filly, regarding it as a
44 HADJI IN SYRIA.
challenge , gave one snort of defiance, and was
off like the lightning ! But poor me ! Reader,
what do you think became of the proud equestrian
Hadji ! There I lay half buried in the
sand and shells , and all my proud aspirations
of equestrian celebrity with me. The reader
will not , therefore, be surprised when I confess
that everything like pride of horsemanship I
have since eschewed and left behind me entombed
in the sands of Ahtlit !-concluding
that " an horse is a vain thing for safety."
In disagreeable contrast with the luxuries
of the convent, is our night's lodging at the
filthy little mud village of Tantura , where we
are compelled to spend the night. Here we lie
on the bare ground , in the same room- if such
I may call the mud wall and bush - top pen in
which we lodged- with all kinds of animals ,
not excepting several species of the insect tribe ;
and these, though the most diminutive in size ,
cause us the greatest amount of trouble . One
could patiently endure the company of such
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM. 45
harmless companions as the horses, mules,
donkeys, cows, cats, and rats, that jointly
occupied the room with us ; but that of the
smaller order interferes most materially both
with one's bodily rest and equanimity of mind.
Never did we leave a place with such heartfelt
joy ; never was breakfast so hastily despatched,
and preparations completed in so short
a space of time as those preceding our departure
next morning. But apropos of this same " ori
ental insect," as it is called,-there is a certain
plant growing abundantly hereabouts , as we
afterwards learned, which instantly paralyzes
these nimble-footed gentry. A portion of the
powdered leaf not exceeding a pin's head in
size, if placed in their vicinity, will instantly
prove fatal-as I have often seen proved by
the natives for the conviction and amusement
of curious and incredulous travellers .
We shortly come in sight of Cæsarea. It
was here that Paul spoke so eloquently before
Felix, Agrippa , and the beautiful but ill-famed
46 HADJI IN SYRIA.
Bernice ; here the Gentiles were first received
into the church, and here too Herod Agrippa
"was smitten by the angel, and consumed of
worms, because he gave not God the glory."
This famous city was also the dwelling-place
of Philip the Evangelist, and his " five virgin
daughters who did prophesy ." Although once
so important, Cæsarea is now merely marked
by magnificent ruins ; and its only inhabitants
are howling jackals and unapproachable porcupines,
the dancing satyrs of Scripture ; bringing
to mind the following prediction, now so
literally verified : " Their towers and fortresses
shall become dens for wild beasts ."
Here Yuseph has an opportunity of displaying
his valor, for we are suddenly startled by
the appearance of wild Bedawin , dimly seen
within the mouth of a dark cave. Yuseph ,
however, is accustomed to these things , for he
tells us " he has kilt more than one of these
fellows in his day ." With a grand flourish of
the deadly instruments carried in his girdle, he
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM . 47
soon frightens them off, much to the joy of all
our company, but is evidently no little frightened
himself, as well he might be, at the
thought of such unequal combat-for their
numbers far exceeded ours, and the wonder is
they did not put their evidently preconcerted
scheme into effect.
And this is not the only adventure which
signalized our ride through this wild region of
country. On arriving at the banks of a deep
and rapid river farther on , Yuseph himself
hesitated to attempt a passage. All agreed
that such a thing was preposterous, and the
ladies of course endorsed this fully . One of
the party was despatched higher up the stream,
in the hope of finding a safer crossing- place ;
and as he drew near on his return , I anxiously
scrutinized his brown face, in search of kindling
eye and joyous countenance-sure indications.
of good news ; but good news he had none ; on
the contrary, a passage was less feasible higher
than where we stood . A party of Bedawin up
48 HADJI IN SYRIA .
approached, and for the first time we felt a
sense of relief instead of fear, at the sight of
their dark forms, for we thought perchance
their familiarity with the country might afford
us some assistance in finding a crossing-place .
Sure enough they were quite ready to pilot us
across, but insisted upon the safety of crossing
at that very spot. One of them waded far into
the stream, and beckoned us to follow. Fearlessly
we now urged our horses onward , following
in the wake of the head and shoulders preceding
us. But when the head only of the
man appeared above water, our courage failed,
and with one consent we turned back.
now clearly saw that this was a ruse of the
wily fellows to decoy the unsuspicious Franks
into the river, where we would inevitably meet
with a watery grave- they themselves in the
mean time reaping their reward on shore , by
possessing themselves of infidel goods and
chattels !
We
Poor Achmet ! He was sadly lamed by his
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM . 49
struggle in the mad waters, and could not for
some time travel as briskly as before, although
encouraged by many a kind and sympathizing
word from his doting master and rider, the
brave Yuseph.
Fortunately, by following the stream a long
distance, we at last effected a passage. But it
was no easy matter to dismiss the Bedawin,
whose provocation at the ill success of their
stratagem, vented itself in the most fearful
threats and curses.
Suddenly we enter upon one of the loveliest
plains on earth — a perfect garden spot- none
other than the valley of Sharon . As we ride
over its carpet of flowers of every hue and
shape, we cannot but obey the irresistible impulse
to dismount and pluck them for the
leaves of our herbariums. But how sad the
reflection that their existence is so ephemeral
! There is far more truth than might be
supposed in the reputed evanescence of a cer-
5
50 HADJI IN SYRIA .
tain Syrian flower, " that buds, and blooms ,
and dies within an hour."
We are now approaching Jaffa, the ancient
Joppa, supposed to have been founded by
Japhet, son of Noah, a small sea-port town of
no interest in itself, but fraught with biblical
and historical associations of the most stirring
nature . It was here that Peter raised to life
the charitable Dorcas, and restored her to her
astonished friends gathered around her lifeless
form . This time-honored place is conspicuously
situated on a hill partially defended by
a wall, while two-thirds of the base of the hill
are washed by the sea.
In the absence of hotels, rooms are taken in
the Armenian convent, and , from our windows,
we look out upon the sea, and the beautiful
orange and lemon groves for which the neighborhood
of the town is noted-a quantity of
whose golden fruit was lately shipped for Queen
Victoria. Our first walk is directed to the
house of Simon the tanner, which tradition
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM . 51
persists in designating, notwithstanding the
frequent overthrows of the town. It agrees
in many respects with the Bible narrative .
The house of Tabitha is also shown, but, instead
of an " upper chamber," we are conducted
into a low cave. On the south of the town is
a spot recalling one of the dark pages of history-
the scene of the massacre of the four
thousand prisoners, who, upon promise of quarter,
surrendered themselves to the mercy of
Napoleon, as we are informed by an old resident,
from whom we heard the sad tale .
While at Jaffa I had the honor of sitting in the
very recess of the wall in which the divan of the
Emperor was laid ; and, at night, I slept in a
window casement overhanging the sea. Such
a position may serve very forcibly to remind
one of the incident of the young man falling
from the window while the Apostle Paul was
preaching till midnight and talking till daybreak
; but Eutychus could scarcely have tumbled
out of such a window as this . Oriental
52 HADJI IN SYRIA.
houses are frequently built with these projecting
windows, in which cushions are laid , sometimes
serving the double purpose of divan
during the day and bed at night.
Leaving this diluvian city about mid-day, a
few hours' ride brings us to Ramleh, and we are
told by the reverend fathers, who extend to us
the hospitality of their convent, that we occupy
the site of the house of Joseph, the rich Arimathean.
As we sometimes alight to rest beneath these
great rocks, which become more and more frequent
as we approach Jerusalem, we cannot
but recall the expression in the Bible representing
the weary traveller seeking the " shadow
of a great rock" as his only refuge from the
scorching rays of a noonday sun. In a thickly
wooded country the shadow of a tree would
very naturally be sought, and in this land,
which abounds in rocks, but is poorly supplied
with trees, the traveller is constantly reminded
of the allusion of the sweet singer of Israel
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM . 53
who penned those beautiful Psalms among
these very scenes.
A short distance from Ramleh we pass the
site of the city called Lydda in the New Testament,
and Ludd by the Arabs, where Eneas
was cured by the Apostle Peter . Our path
again lay over a rough and mountainous region
of country, but we will soon meet with a rich
reward for all the toils and fatigue we have
been called upon to endure . We are approaching
Jerusalem ! An hour more and our longing
eyes will be greeted with the sight of the
holy city ; a little while, and our feet shall
stand within the gates of " Jerusalem , our
happy home !"
A sudden view of swelling domes and towering
minarets rising dimly in the distance ,
causes us to check our horses, and raise our
hearts and voices in gratitude to God, while
we gaze upon her as " she sits aloft, begirt with
battlements ." Some of the devout pilgrims of
our party fall down in the dust, silently breath-
5 *
54 HADJI IN SYRIA.
ing forth the fullness of their joy ; and all seem
to realize the absorbing interest of the moment ;
for 'tis an era in our lives never to be forgotten .
On a nearer approach we are enabled to distinguish
many of its interesting localities . The
bold outline of Mount Olivet, crowned with
the Church of Ascension, rising high above
Mount Moriah, on which faithful Abraham
bound his son Isaac to be offered up as a sacrifice,
occupied subsequently by Solomon's Temple
; and Mount Zion , on which the city of
David was built .
“ And throned on her hill sits Jerusalem yet,
But with dust on her forehead and chains on her feet ;
For the crown of her pride to the mocker hath gone,
And the holy Shechinah is dark where it shone."
Entering the lofty portal of the Jaffa Gate
(despite the opposition of the rude soldiers,
who seize our horses' bridles , and loudly demand
" bucksheesh " ) , and turning to the left ,
we alight at the Latin convent, and are corFROM
BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM . 55
dially received and ushered into neat and comfortable
cells by the monks.
Drenched with the rain , which had fallen
nearly all day, and shivering with cold, we
called for a fire ; and a large chafing dish of
charcoal being brought, we closed the door and
laid aside our wet garments. But scarcely had
we offered thanks for the many and signal deliverances
we had experienced from impending
danger, when one of our party, dear as life to
all of us , suddenly swooned away ! As it was
immediately suggested that it might be owing
to the accumulated carbonic acid of the fire,
the door was opened, the gas escaped , and my
beloved mother was restored to consciousness .
But travellers should be on their guard against
charcoal fires in close rooms-several persons
having met an untimely death in this same
convent, from the inhalation of this noxious
gas .
" Nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep,"
having infused sufficient strength and energy
56 HADJI IN SYRIA.
into our party, we are ready for an excursion,
and feel an intense longing to look upon those
scenes towards which my imagination in early
childhood had gone out like the dove from the
hand of Noah, and returned finding no restingplace
; but now Mount Zion is before me ,
Mount Olivet receives the first beams of the
rising sun, and I am standing within the walls
of the " City of the Great King !"