
CHAPTER XV .
PEEP INTO A TURKISH HAREEM.
It was with no little pleasure that I accepted
an invitation from the family of the Bash Catib,
whose office is next in rank to that of the
Pacha, to spend a day with them. They had
proved themselves true friends ; but, apart from
this, I had long been anxious to obtain an insight
into hareem life.
On entering the house I was greeted with
the usual cry of welcome, " Ahlan Wassahlan, "
in which every occupant of the hareem united.
Even the slaves ran to the door clapping their
hands and making the noisiest demonstrations
of delight. Five minutes after I had taken my
seat, fingâns of coffee and pipes were handed,
in which I attempted to join them, but the
(214)
PEEP INTO A TURKISH HAREEM . 215
-
effort proved a signal failure. The delicate
workmanship of the tiny cups containing the
coffee, by no means exempts one from a burnt
tongue, nor makes palatable the unsweetened
beverage for the charm of Turkish coffee
(with some ! ) consists in its being boiling hot,
and the absence of sugar . The narghileh, so
tempting to the eye, with its crystal urn and
amber mouth-piece , was soon laid aside with a
disgust which I fear was hardly understood by
my Turkish friends, who so highly appreciate
these luxuries that most of their time is devoted
to their enjoyment.
There is but one Turkish lady on my list of
acquaintances who can boast of her ability to
read and write ! Her presence afforded some
variety to the trivial subjects generally discussed
; for she not only possesses the rare accomplishments
of reading and writing, but has
improved them ; and her conversation showed
that she was conversant with the Koran and
other text-books of Mohammedan faith . In
216 HADJI IN SYRIA.
addition to this, a pilgrimage to Mecca, and
a hand ever ready to relieve the wants of the
poor, have secured for her a wide-spread fame.
About noon, dinner was announced ; not,
however, before each one had washed her
hands and face , and observed the usual forms
of prayer. A large round waiter was placed
on a stool richly inlaid with pearl, and upon it
little dishes in endless variety were temptingly
displayed . Among them, confections prepared
from rose leaves and apricots, transparent
jellies and soups composed of a variety of nuts .
Cucumbers scooped out and filled with rice and
minced meat, were a favorite dish ; and another,
almost as popular, was a bowl of minute cylinders
of dough, dried in the sun, and then mixed
in a sauce of butter and sugar. Cushions laid
on the floor were substituted for chairs ; but
alas for knives and forks ! In their stead my
only resort was a wooden spoon . The favorite
wife, and the Queen of the Hareem, frequently
handed me morsels of food with her own
PEEP INTO A TURKISH HAREEM. 217
henna-tipped fingers, intended as a mark of
great honor.
Having done full justice to our elegant little
dinner, the luxurious divan was resumed, and
a warm discussion entered upon as to the
manner of spending the afternoon . The bath
was proposed by some, but a dissenting voice
was heard from the seat of honor, where the
chief lady gracefully reclined, in favor of music
and dancing. A messenger was accordingly
despatched for tambourines and dancing-women
-for in the East dancing is considered far beneath
any but the poorer class, who make it a
trade , and charge a certain sum for their
services on festive occasions . Their dancing
consists in a few undulating movements of the
body, not ungraceful, and accompanied by
castanets and the tambourine .
My European dress caused them as much
amusement as their curious apparel afforded
me, and they were not satisfied until we had
exchanged costumes. A mirror was brought
19
218 HADJI IN SYRIA.
into requisition , in which they wonderingly
surveyed the change wrought by the sport.
A large number had assembled to see the lady
from the " new world," and they were very
curious to know something about the manners
and customs of my country. Great was their
surprise on hearing of the liberty enjoyed by
their Western sisters , which, strange to say,
although I used all the terms of enthusiasm
my knowledge of Arabic could command, they
did not seem at all to covet. They could not
conceive of a woman possessing a soul . On
asking one of them what would become of her
after death, she replied , " I shall be put under
the ground- nothing more." " And your husband,"
said I, " will he be doomed to the same
fate ?" " Oh, no," she sadly replied , " he will
be taken above, and there enjoy all the delights
of paradise."
Among them were some lovely Georgians,
profusely adorned with sparkling jewels and
the purest of Orient pearls ; there were few


TURKISH DANCING GIRL AND HAREEM .

PEEP INTO A TURKISH HAREEM . 219
beside these with any pretensions to beauty .
Nearly all, however, had the soft gazelle eye
so often apostrophized by the poet .
I left them, feeling more grateful than ever
for the light I enjoy, and the hope of a blissful
immortality, and ardently desiring to share
with them my own glorious civil and religious
privileges, which would at once release them
from the leading cause of their degradationthe
tyranny exercised over them by their husbands,
who can put them away for any reason,
every reason, and no assignable reason.
I can but feel emotions of deepest indignation
at the painful recollection of quite a pretty
young girl, who was inhumanly divorced by her
hard- hearted husband , before either of them was
twelve years of age -simply because he saw a
more beautiful girl, and was unfortunately able
to buy her. Oh ! the inexpressible, and, by us,
inconceivable wretchedness flowing from this
awful traffic in female flesh- the burning shame
and crying sin of Oriental life ! Love, of course ,
220 HADJI IN SYRIA .
is a plant that will thrive in no such soil . Indeed,
it seems to be rather an exotic in the
Orient at this day, cultivated only here and
there as a mere hot-house plant .
While memory performs her functions, I
shall never forget the impression made on my
mind, when witnessing the anguish of a poor
girl, as she went along weeping to the house
of a brutal old one-eyed monster, who had
bought her for his pandemonian hareem . Nor
is it the father and husband alone that thus
tyrannize over the degraded women of the East.
The authority of the brother, in the event of
the death of the father, even though the mother
is still living, is quite as absolute .
He can
beat them without mercy and with impunity,
and though he may be younger than his seven
sisters, it is he alone that sells them to their
heartless husbands, or in other words, to the
master who will give most for them .
Happily now, however, this is rather a rare
case, owing to the ascendancy of Frank influ
PEEP INTO A TURKISH HAREEM . 221
ence . Indeed , the Orientals are extremely impressible
by the example of their more civilized
neighbors . Several incidents may serve
to illustrate this. On first arriving in Jerusalem
, the male portion of the family were
always served first, when we were handed
refreshments at their houses ; but, seeing that
we observed the very reverse order of things ,
they soon imitated our example. The veil has
also often been stealthily drawn aside, in imitation
of our non-observance of this strange custom
of smothering oneself. In cases of cruel
treatment by their husbands, such as dashing
any missile at them which may chance to lie
in their way, beating them with sticks, and
otherwise causing the blood to flow, our remonstrances
have not unfrequently proved effectual .
As may be imagined, the more sensitive of these
maltreated creatures are thus rendered very
miserable, even entreating for poison in some
instances to put an end to their existence, as
well as that of their cruel masters . It is well
19 *
222 HADJI IN SYRIA.
known, that while Oriental women are taught
to believe that they have no souls, they are
impressed with the idea that their husbands
will revel in delight in the bowers of paradise,
where each will have a hareem of any number
of black-eyed houris, varying from seventy to
seventy thousand, to administer to his happiness.
But, notwithstanding this, these depraved
creatures are very religious , as far as
bodily exercise goes , strictly observing their
many fasts and festivals, and devoting much
of their time to prayer. And their prayers,
although so complicated , lengthy, and fatiguing,
are not confined to their mosques or their
homes, but, whether visiting or on any excursion
of pleasure, they no sooner hear the sonorous
voice of the muezzim, than their girdles,
sheets, or mats , are spread , their faces, arms,
hands, and feet bared, and they commence the
intricate process of prayer. Not twice or thrice
a day, but five times do these deluded creatures
go through their genuflexions and prosPEEP
INTO A TURKISH HAREEM. 223
trations ; thus setting us an example, which, if
imitated to but a limited extent, would prove
a blessing not only to ourselves, but reflexly to
them .
One day we had a visit from several of the
hareems of the nobility, numbering twenty
ladies and half as many slaves, and, although
away from home, they sent their slaves to the
well for water, performed their ablutions, and
each one, immediately on the cry of the muezzim,
devoutly prayed . Of course, their veils
and sheets were laid aside, and I was not a
little amused at the great commotion made by
the sudden entrance into the court of a Turk,
while they were eating with uncovered faces.
The slaves set up a loud scream, and, terrorstruck,
ran in every direction for their mistress's
veils. As for the mistresses themselves , it was
actually distressing to hear their piercing cries
-and such was their effect on the unfortunate
intruder, that he made a precipitate retreat,
224 HADJI IN SYRIA .
amid shouts of " Roohee ! roohee !"- away!
away !
Gratitude is one of their redeeming qualities.
What will the ungrateful lady of the Occident
think of her Oriental sisters abasing themselves
to kiss the feet of a dispenser of medicines, to
show their appreciation of some slight medical
services he may have rendered them ? I have
seen a lady of the upper circle of Jerusalem
society struggling to perform this humiliating
act, and this, too , in spite of an uncultivated
mind and soul . The education of Oriental women
is not only entirely neglected , but strongly
reprobated by public sentiment-almost the sole
arbiter of manners and customs in that country,
if not in this. Indeed , must not this necessarily
result from the contempt and servitude in
which she is held ? Among rich and poor, in
the family of the Effendi and the Fellah , she
is alike ignorant. Her accomplishments consist
in being able to cook , arrange her turban
tastefully, and administer to the every whim
PEEP INTO A TURKISH HAREEM . 225
of her doting husband ! Odious as he must too
often be, yet she has no other God than her
husband, and to gratify him with the strictest
obedience is the most praiseworthy of all good
works she can perform.
Has not the reader already concluded that
there is but one Sun that can penetrate the
darkness that envelopes these unhappy creatures-
the Sun of Righteousness ! It delivers
her from her present oppression and future
punishment . How important, then, to light up
in her mind the knowledge that she possesses
an immortal soul ! How binding upon us to
inspire her with the hope of heaven ! How
urgent the call upon our sympathy and benevolence
! How plaintively the cry comes wailing
across the waters, not from the man of Macedonia,
but from the poor degraded woman of
the land of Sarah and the Marys- " Come over
and help us !"