CHAPTER XIII .
SHOPPING EXPEDITON.
THE bazaars of no Oriental city are comparable
to those of Damascus , a city which is so beautiful
in every respect, that Mohammed dared
not look upon it , fearing that he should find so
entrancing an earthly paradise as entirely to
rob him of any desire to reach that of the skies.
But Damascus is not Jerusalem, and as everybody
likes to know how one goes shopping in
Jerusalem, I shall not withhold a description
of its bazaars because of their small share of
attractiveness . True, the idea of shopping in
Jerusalem is not a very poetical one , and some ,
I dare say , suppose it is an unpractised art in
this city of hallowed associations . But not so
think the residents, who, notwithstanding the
( 195)
196 HADJI IN SYRIA .
indifference of the shops, find an occasional
visit to them quite an indispensable requisite
to their comfort. My first expedition of this
kind, apart from the novelty, afforded me but
little satisfaction . Being uninitiated , I gladly
accepted the offer of several of my Turkish
friends to accompany me, who called quite
early in the morning, that we might devote
several hours to this all-absorbing feminine
occupation, and the remainder of the day to a
bath . Many quiet streets were threaded before
joining the busy crowd which thronged the
bazaars .
Jerusalem being a spot of so much attraction
to every nation under heaven, we here see
every variety of costume, making the bazaars
a continual carnival. One moment you are
greeted with a garb betokening the highest civilization
, and the next, with the coarse camel's
hair garment of a Bedawin from the burning
sands of the desert . At one step you meet the
black silk wrappings of the Egyptian women,
SHOPPING EXPEDITION. 197
and the next, the ghostly white robes of her
Syrian sister. But nothing can compare, in
richness and beauty, with the flowing robes
and full white turban of her lord and master.
The wayfaring man wears a girdle which is so
arranged that one end answers the purpose of
a bag, in which he carries his money, valuables,
and other small articles ; and in his bosom may
be found his balances, which every Oriental carries
at all times, with which the coin is weighed
and by which its value is determined- and if
accompanied by his wife and children , you will
be reminded of the words of Isaiah : " They
shall bring their sons in their arms, and their
daughters shall be carried on their shoulders."
The woman occasionally carries her child on
her shoulders, with a water-skin on her back .
Along the dark and narrow alleys rather
than streets we groped our way, now retreating
within a door at the approach of the towering
camel, and now hastily stepping out of the
way of a string of donkeys trudging along under
17 *
198
HADJI IN SYRIA.
a load of brush of gigantic dimensions . This
is intended for fuel, and reminds one of the
expression used by our Saviour : " The grass
which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the
oven," a passage which greatly perplexes those
living in a country whose wide-spread forests
afford abundance of material for fuel. But in
the Holy Land, which is so scantily supplied
with trees, the passage is perfectly applicable,
for in the absence of wood , necessity compels
the people to burn brush, roots, dried grasses,
and weeds of all kinds, so plentifully growing
in the fields ; and immense donkey-loads are
daily brought to the city for this purpose.
Thorns also, which grow in great profusion,
are used as fuel, and explain the figures used
in Ecclesiastes : " As the crackling of thorns
under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool ; " and
in Isaiah , " As thorns cut up they shall be
burned in the fire ."
There is a ditch in the centre of most of the
streets, but there are no sidewalks and no paveSHOPPING
EXPEDITION. 199
ments, for the unevenly laid stones do not deserve
the name ; nor are there any lamp-posts .
At night you see here and there the dim flickering
of a little earthen lamp of olive oil beside
a reclining figure of a man, who lies sleeping
upon a raised platform in front of his bazaar ;
and this is the only light one enjoys in a nocturnal
walk through the city. Hence the necessity
of carrying our own lamp-a necessity
which is still farther enforced by the regulation
inflicting fine and imprisonment upon all who
are caught in the street without a light after
an early hour. The streets are lined with bare
stone walls of prison-like houses , broken by a
very few, and very small, latticed windows ,
and covered usually with arches , or pieces of
matting, stretched from house to house-the
walls generally ruined , and the matting always
tattered . Thus, Jerusalem wears an air of
gloom and misery, and its inhabitants move
about in keeping with the wretchedness of the
streets and houses. It is impossible to discern
200 HADJI IN SYRIA.
a glad face among them, and the camels carefully
plant their feet, noiselessly pursuing their
way as if intuitively afraid of breaking the
silent gloom. Suddenly, however, we enter a
street where the people move more briskly—
the camels are hurried along by loud threats
from their drivers, and the shopmen still more
loudly proclaim the merits of their wares .
Country women are seated on the sides of the
streets with baskets of fruits and vegetables.
The shops of the dry goods venders are nothing
more than rows of small platforms , four
or five feet square, with shelves arranged
around them on which the goods are placed.
The purchaser stands in the street , while the
merchant indolently reclines on a rug spread
over the platform . With utter indifference he
lays aside his narghileh, and at first seems very
careless whether we buy or not ; but presently
launches into great volubility on the excellence
of his fabrics . Oriental bazaars have not
the least pretensions to taste, but often make
SHOPPING EXPEDITION. 201
a great display of richly embroidered goods.
A white handkerchief is unfolded , which, although
embroidered in gold, is of the coarsest
cotton, and tears in the opening. Speaking of
taste, reminds me that, among other purchases
of one of my companions, was a spool of white
cotton, with which she intended making up her
robe of black silk !
Huge piles of slippers are tumbled from the
shelves -some of the plain yellow morocco,
without ornament, and others with embroidery
and rosettes of pearls enclosing colored stones—
embroidered jackets of purple-cotton velvet
worked with tinsel and bright silks, or gold and
silk braid -caps of scarlet cloth with high raised
gold work, and tassels half a yard in lengthstriped
silk sashes from Damascus - napkins perfumed
with otto of rose, and embroidered in the
corners- ready made trowsers, and red fez caps
without seam. Calicoes are not only rare, but
almost worthless , and their prices nearly as
high as those of silks. Further on is a fancy
202 HADJI IN SYRIA.
shop , with sparkling cut glass narghilehs, and
little coffee-cup stands of richly embossed silver
-Mohammed's prohibition of silver to the contrary
notwithstanding . For these they charge a
hundred piastres, or five dollars . Other trinkets
of hareem use are here displayed , and next is
the drug bazaar, where all kinds of spices, drugs
and perfumes, are sold . Otto of roses , as well
as rose water, made from the roses of Wady el
Werd (valley of roses) , can be bought at a marvelously
low price . Further on, the respectable
Armenian is seen manufacturing small trinkets
and trifles with his scanty supply of instruments
; and those, of the rudest manufacture.
With them, however, he forms a ring, or sets
an amulet, with wonderful skill . Interspersed
among these are shops where bushels of beads
are displayed , made of camel's bone , amber,
sandal, and olive wood ; then there are amulets
, blood stones from India, and trinkets in
pearl, made, by the Bethlehemites, in imitation
of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, and a
SHOPPING EXPEDITION . 203
long catalogue of saints which are in great
requisition among the devout pilgrims . Here
and there a man may be seen standing by a
small earthen furnace of embers, across which
he throws wires strung with small pieces of
mutton- a very popular dish . The bazaar is
densely crowded with shrouded women and
pilgrims from all parts of the world, and the
air resounds with the screams of the camel
and donkey drivers . Rooh, dahrac , woojac,
they cry-" stand aside, your back, your face,"
which, united to the babel of languages, and
the fierce gesticulation , characteristic of Orientals,
presents a scene of noise and confusion
completely bewildering. Add to this the braying
of donkeys, the growling of camels , the clattering
of horses' hoofs on the uneven stones ,
one's care to avoid, at every step, the accumulated
heaps of filth and debris, and the hot
rays of the sun piercing through the ragged
matting overhead, and the reader may be content
with the picture without wishing to participate
in the reality.