
CHAPTER XVI.
DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE.
In order to convey an idea of the domestic
architecture of Jerusalem, it may be well to
give a description of one of the private houses,
which will serve as a specimen of the whole.
I will therefore introduce the reader into our
home, situated in the Jewish quarter, and occupying
one of the most interesting localities
in Jerusalem. An arched doorway leads into
a large court paved with stones, and surrounded
partly by a wall and partly by rooms . During
the sickly season there may be seen crowds of
sick persons impatiently waiting in this court
to be admitted into the hackmè or dispensary,
which, together with the stable , opens on one
side of this square court, while opposite, is a
(226)


MECTKHCUOHARUEMKNMBICEEOSIHRRHL.,

DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE . 227
little elevated garden of oleanders, rosemary,
and other shrubbery, surrounded by a stone
wall. The kitchen, however, is the most important
and unique feature of the court- it
consists of a small room with abundance of
tonjeras (Arab copper kettles) of all sizes , from
a gallon to a pint, and a solitary frying-pan ,
brought from across the waters. The fireplace
is altogether different from our ideas of
a fire-place . Built against one side of the
room is a projecting table of stone and plaster
work in which rows of ovens are scooped out ,
with grates laid across them for burning charcoal
. A staircase leads directly over this unique
kitchen into a small upper court opening into a
chamber and dining room . Passing through
the latter, we find ourselves on the housetop ,
surrounded by a wall about five feet high ; and
how often have I walked on this terrace and
plucked a drooping blade- bringing to mind
the emblematical allusion of the sweet singer
of Israel to its stunted growth and withered
228 HADJI IN SYRIA .
appearance . Constantly exposed to a burning
sun, and having for its soil only the plaster
connecting the stones, its frailty affords the
Psalmist a fit emblem of the sudden destruction
of those who despise the interests of
Zion-
"They shall be ashamed and turned back,
All those that hate Zion.
They shall be as grass upon the housetops,
Which, before one plucks it, withers away ,
With which the mower fills not his hand,
Nor the sheaf- binder his arms."
The flat roofs of Oriental houses afford a
most striking illustration of numberless Scriptural
allusions, but imperfectly understood by
the occupant of houses with pointed roofs.
The Orientals spend much of their time on
the housetop , which is of easy access by
flights of stone steps, and they are generally
surrounded by a wall of sufficient height to
conceal their occupants from view even of
those on the roofs of adjoining houses . Hence
DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE . 229
we cannot accuse Peter of giving publicity to
his devotions when he resorted to the housetop
to pray. Small chambers are sometimes
built in the corner of the wall ; and in these
little kioscos the inmates of the house spend
most of their time during summer, but they
cannot be used during the inclement season ;
for, besides their exposed situation, they are
lightly built for the sake of coolness during
warm weather. But, notwithstanding, they
are sometimes very damp and uncomfortable .
Solomon says, " It is better to dwell in the
corner of a housetop than in a wide house
with a brawling woman ."
In the middle of the floor is the mouth of
one of the tanks or wells-recalling another
Scriptural incident. It was in one of these
wells or cisterns that the woman at Bahurim
concealed Jonathan and Ahimaaz from the
messengers sent by Absalom in pursuit of
them. In different parts of the house are
several wells opening into the courts, and I
20
230 HADJI IN SYRIA.
often recall the narrative on seeing the floor
of the court covered with corn or wool spread
out to dry in the sun, for the well at Bahurim
was in a court, and its mouth was hid by
covering it with corn. These cisterns are
sometimes dry, and it was at such a time, of
course , that this ruse was resorted to .
We are now standing high above the valley
of the Tyropoon, and just opposite Mount
Olivet and the Temple enclosure . We are
a hundred feet above the huts in the valley
called the Mugrabin quarter-the house
standing on a bold rock projecting from the
most precipitous part of Mount Zion . In its
rocky base are caves into which we at one
time contemplated a retreat for safety when
the city and surrounding country were first
convulsed by the Turco-Russian war.
I shall not soon forget the deep anxiety and
dread we all experienced soon after war was
declared, when the fanatical spirit of the Fellahin
was first aroused . We had learned from
DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE . 231
the proprietor of "the Tombs of the Kings,"
that a royal sarcophagus had been discovered
in one of its recesses, a few years previous, and
removed to the Mechemeh, or Congressional
Hall of Jerusalem, now identified as occupying
the site of the " Council Chamber," or Sanhedrim.
Permission for a visit had been obtained
from the proper authorities, and I was sitting
there taking a sketch of the room and its contents,
greatly enjoying myself, when the Bash
Catib's servant came running in, almost breathless,
and with the deepest anxiety depicted in
his countenance (for he had all along shown
us much courtesy and kindness ) , told us
to flee for our lives - that the Fellahin had
taken the city ! We accordingly fled to our
premises with all haste, and barricadoed the
doors as best we could . But before we could
make sure our defence, he came running, with
joy now lighting up his face , to inform us that
though they had entered the city in large num232
HADJI IN SYRIA.
bers, they were not armed ; and were being
turned out as rapidly as possible.
This valley, which is no other than the Tyropoon
or Cheesemongers' Valley of Josephus,
was once spanned by the magnificent bridge so
much admired by the Queen of Sheba on her
memorable visit to its architect King Solomon.
Its remains still exist, and astonish the traveller
by the immense size of the arched stones.
About thirty miles distant are the mountains
of Moab, which, at certain parts of the day,
vie with the skies in their rich and ever varying
tints. At our right, Mount Zion is covered
with picturesque and dilapidated old buildings,
standing boldly against a background of sky .
A solitary palm tree , thick groves of cactus,
and the notched battlements of the city walls,
complete the landscape .
This site is reckoned one of the most notable
in the city ; for it was on this " stronghold of
Zion" that all the rulers of Judea, from King
Jebus down to King Agrippa, built their magDOMESTIC
ARCHITECTURE. 233
nificent palaces ; and its present remains show
that it was either the site of a crusader's
church, or that of the palace of the Frank
king .
Retracing our steps, and descending a narrow
stairway, we emerge into a court with a
circular skylight over the lower end, but
covered at the upper by an arched ceiling. A
tent is stretched over the skylight, and this
part of the court is converted into a chapel.
All around, are chambers with vaulted ceilings,
and windows guarded with iron bars. The
exterior of the house has the appearance of an
old castle, or rather prison, for the windows are
not only few and small, but add still more to
its prison-like appearance by their massive iron
bars, an inseparable part of every house in the
East. Suliman Effendi , however, a wealthy
Turkish resident of Jerusalem, has lately astonished
his neighbors by furnishing his windows
with green Venetian blinds, giving his house
quite a modern appearance.
20 *