CHAPTER XII.
TURKISH WEDDING.
THE expected wedding of the lordly little
Effendi Moosa and the gentle Dahudeiah , had
been the topic of conversation for some time in
Jerusalem, and a very brilliant " Fantazea"
was anticipated by all the Turkish gossips,
who discussed the matter between their sips
of coffee and puffs at the chibouque . Mother
and myself were fortunate enough to be among
the invited guests ; and on the appointed day a
slave was sent to accompany us to the house
of the Bash Catib , where the entertainment
was to take place. The male portion , as a matter
of course, was excluded from all insight into
the tabooed cloisters of these secluded beings .
After threading a few dark archways, the
(184)
TURKISH WEDDING . 185
servant halted at rather a loftier door than is
usually seen in Oriental dwellings, and we were
met by half a dozen slaves, who conducted us
up several flights of gloomy steps, and through
as many walled courts , into a spacious apartment
where a real Arabian-night-entertainment
scene presented itself. On the divan,
which extended all around the room, were
gracefully lolling about a hundred Turkish
ladies of the élite of Jerusalem, each one sipping
an exquisite little fingân of coffee, or smoking
a chibouque gilded and mounted with an
amber mouth-piece .
Several dancing-women were moving in
undulating (and but for their trailing robes
and trousers) , even graceful steps , rattling
little bells placed on the forefinger and thumb
of each hand as they danced ; while two or
three more sat on a rug playing the tambourine
and thrumming a red morocco drum- like
instrument, producing anything but music.
On our entrance each one saluted us in the
16 *
186 HADJI IN SYRIA .
graceful style of the East, and some lovely
little children ran to kiss our hands . The
only daughter of the Bash Catib was present,
and as usual received the homage paid her on
all occasions, from the fact of her meritorious
pilgrimage to Mecca. Her dress I noticed as
extremely chaste and simple, in contrast with
the gorgeous costumes and profusion of ornaments
worn by the others . It consisted merely
of white merino trousers and tunic spangled
with small specks of gold, a light gauze turban,
and the usual yellow slippers-her hands wanting
the almost indispensable henna with which
those of the rest were dyed in curious and fantastic
figures. We were not long seated before
the everlasting fingân of piping hot coffee was
served, which we swallowed down philosophically,
notwithstanding we knew from sad experience
that a burnt tongue would be the
inevitable consequence . The loud peal of the
muezzim was soon heard calling the " faithful"
to prayers, and several of the elderly ladies,
TURKISH WEDDING. 187
more devout than the rest, after washing their
hands and feet, immediately commenced the
routine of the various postures of the Mohammedan
prayers the dancing, singing, tambourine
music, and clapping of hands, going on
during the whole time . Prayers being over , a
stool inlaid with pearl was set before us, on
which was placed a large round copper tray,
filled with a great variety of little salmagundi
dishes . Many of these diminutive tables were
spread, and cushions were laid around them
for the accommodation of the guests . A napkin
fringed with gold was handed to each, and
we, being Franks, were allowed the luxury of
coarse wooden spoons . The others, sans knives,
sans forks, sans spoons, as a matter of course
ate with their hands ; and it was curious, to
say the least of it, to see their jewelled and
henna-dyed fingers dipping into a greasy dish
of rice, and cramming their mouths to an extent
almost incredible ! The dishes , notwithstanding
their excessive richness, were quite
188 HADJI IN SYRIA.
palatable ; one, of the consistency of paste,
composed of gum arabic, sugar, and a variety
of nuts, was extremely pleasant.
Late in the afternoon I noticed each one
equipping herself in her sheet and boots, and
on inquiring the reason of such a bustle, found
they were all going in procession to Neby Daûd,
the residence of the bride, to conduct her from
thence by torch-light to the dwelling of her
future husband . Readily consenting to accompany
them, I soon found myself in the midst
of a long string of ghostly white sheets , winding
through the innumerable dark alleys of
the Jewish quarter. The Pilgrim led the
train, and, being in delicate health, rode a
horse splendidly caparisoned . On reaching
Neby Daûd, we were shown into a large upper
apartment, where the bride sat on a raised
throne as immovable as a statue , and completely
enveloped in a large red sheet. An
altar adorned with silver censers fuming with
incense, and tall candlesticks ornamented with
TURKISH WEDDING. 189
gilt leaves, stood in front of her, while a
sheathed sword hung over her head.
Having partaken of coffee and sherbet, we
were sprinkled with rose water and perfumed
with incense . A company of hired women in
the mean time kept up a constant clapping of
hands and shrill singing, or rather screaming,
about the " arroos" and " arreess" (bride and
groom) , until dark, when, fortunately for my
aching head, they ceased at the approach of
thirty or forty of their lords, who had come
from the city. In the midst of this train the
bridegroom walked under a canopy accompanied
by torch-bearers and a fantastically
dressed clown . On their arrival, the little
groom was led up stairs to the bride, whose
veil he raised to obtain a first glimpse of her
face-then suddenly extinguished the only
lighted candle, afterwards making a mock
attempt to relight it . In total darkness the
whole company, bride, groom, and all, rushed
down stairs. The little pair were placed under
190 HADJI IN SYRIA.
a canopy ; the torches were lighted, and amid
the shrill screaming of the women, the beating
of the tambourine and " tom-tom," accompanied
by the blowing of a loud whistle, the procession
again moved on . The torch-bearers led
the train, then a long string of turbans, and in
their midst the canopy held aloft by four
bearers , while the white-sheeted throng followed
behind .
On arriving at the Bash Catib's house, the
bride and groom were conducted into separate
apartments, where each was gorgeously attired :
the bride in a perfect blaze of jewels and cloth
of gold, wearing a gilded mitre on her head,
ornamented with diamond stars and crescents .
Her hands, face and feet, which before had
been dyed with henna, were covered with pieces
of gold foil, cut in odd shapes and figures ; and
her eyebrows and eyelids were stained black
with khol . Beneath a hazy veil of gauze,
spangled with gold, she tottered to a raised
throne. After seating herself, several attendTURKISH
WEDDING. 191
ants gathered around and arranged not only
the folds of her robe, but her very eyelids,
which she carefully closed, accompanied by a
caution not to open them.
Her hands were
then placed on her knees, and a slave stationed
at her back, holding in her hand a drawn
sword.
A little wax-doll-like creature, sitting perfectly
motionless, and rigged up as she was,
the figure on the throne now looked as much
unlike a human being as can well be conceived .
This little couple were mere children : the
bride being nine and the groom twelve years
of age ! Not uncommon ages, however, for the
perpetration of matrimony in this country.
The entrance of the groom was now hailed
by loud shouts from the women, and he also
was placed on a throne at the upper end of
the court in which we were assembled, beneath
an immense tent, erected entirely over the
court for this especial occasion . Seeing a
smoking substance on a stand before the throne,
192 HADJI IN SYRIA.
I drew near to ascertain from what it proceeded.
Finding nothing but burning crusts
of bread, I was puzzled to know the meaning
of such a singular ceremony ; but received no
explanation , except that it was quite an indispensable
form. Retreating to my first place
of observation, I amused myself by watching
the scene immediately before the throne . Two
dancing-women danced in rapid motions , and
each held tall wax candles in her hands , which
threw their flitting shadows in every direction
over the assembly.
The bride was now conducted to the middle
of the court, two attendants supporting her
train, and a slave bearing the sword before her.
Slowly she came bowing her head from side
to side, and holding her hands before her face.
Here the groom met her, again drew aside her
veil , and the august little pair were together
led to one of the thrones -glad, no doubt, to
rest awhile from the fatiguing ordeal. The
Pilgrim made way through the crowd with a
TURKISH WEDDING. 193
seat, and placed it directly in front of the little
couple for me to sketch them-exclaiming to
the people to make way for the " bint-el-Hakim"-
daughter of the doctor.
During all these quaint and unmeaning ceremonies,
the women continued clapping their
hands, beating the tambourine, and singing
loudly in eulogy of the bride and groom, whose
noisy nuptials we now had the extreme satisfaction
of hearing were completed . Suffice it
to say, that with a headache, and a terrific
roaring in the ears, we returned home about
nine o'clock at night, notwithstanding the
earnest entreaties of the ladies to remain all
night, and partake of two or three more
suppers.
At a Jewish wedding I afterwards attended,
the ceremonies were somewhat similar to these,
but even more unmeaning and complex. The
little Jewish couple-the groom about thirteen
years of age and the bride eleven- sat under a
canopy of brocaded gold much more lofty and
17
194 HADJI IN SYRIA .
splendid than that of the Turkish pair ; and
in lieu of extinguishing a light, a goblet of
wine was dashed to pieces at their feet . The
ceremonies of these Oriental weddings, though
sadly altered , still remind one very much of
those mentioned in the Bible.