
CHAPTER V.
GETHSEMANE, OLIVET, AND BETHANY.
" Sad Gethsemane
Had memories that it faltered to repeat ;
Such as the strengthening angels marked , appalled ,
Finding no dialect in which to bear
Their woe to heaven ."
GETHSEMANE ! What magic is there in the
name ! Who is not familiar with the sad story
connected with its sacred soil ? and who does
not long to behold this place above all others ?
It is now surrounded by a high wall ; and a
Romish monk guards the gate . As he silently
turns the key, and admits us through the narrow
doorway, what is our surprise on finding it
converted into a modern flower garden ! Rather
attempt to gild refined gold, or add perfume to
( 107)
108 HADJI IN SYRIA.
the violet, than endeavor to increase the interest
of that spot by human art .
There are a few ancient olive trees , however
(seven, I think) , which are the only objects in
keeping with the place. How affecting to sit
beneath them , and read the account of the
night of Christ's agony ! Our hearts bleed as
the incidents of the night of sorrow are vividly
brought before us by the thrilling narrative.
We linger and yet linger on the hallowed
ground, and read and read again of the sufferings
of our adorable Redeemer ; we realize, that
with the closing of the door of the Garden, the
whole world has been shut out from our
thoughts, leaving us in close communion with
Jesus , the Divine sufferer. What Christian
heart would remain indifferent to such associations
! and who would not gladly brave the
toil and danger of voyaging to this land for
the sake of a seat beneath these venerable old
silver-leafed olive trees !
GETHSEMANE, OLIVET, AND BETHANY. 109
" The Palm -the Vine --the Cedar- each hath power ;
But thou, pale Olive ! in thy branches lie
Far deeper spells than prophet grove of old
Might e'er enshrine : —I could not hear thee sigh
To the winds' faintest whisper , nor behold
One shiver of thy leaves' dim silvery green ,
Without high thoughts and solemn, of that scene
When, in the garden, the Redeemer prayed-
When pale stars looked upon his fainting head.
And angels ministering in silent dread,
Trembled, perchance, within thy trembling shade."
After culling a few flowers, whose fragrant
leaves are intended for distribution among
friends at home, we again call upon the monk
to turn his rusty key, and commence the
ascent of Mount Olivet, taking the road that
leads to the Church of Ascension . Here we
are shown the impress of a foot and staff in
the solid rock, which the credulous pilgrim is
told were made by Christ when about to ascend
on high. Around the Church, clusters a little
village, inhabited by the shepherds and farmers
of the neighboring land . On an introduc-
10
110 HADJI IN SYRIA .
tion to the kind old Sheikh , who is intrusted
with the keys of the Church, we are glad to
accept his offer to conduct us to the top of the
minaret, which commands the best view of the
hills round about Jerusalem, as well as Jerusalem
itself. Our eyes feast upon the most interesting
localities on earth . There, right
before us, is the very spot where the Temple
stood, now desecrated by a Mohammedan
mosque, of a thousand hues , and sky-piercing
crescent. Next in prominence are the clumsy,
massive domes of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre,
and far beyond is the ever visible
Tower of Hippicus.
To the left stretches out the wilderness of
Judea ; and, far in the distance, a silvery line
and sparkling flat surface, denote the Jordan
and Dead Sea . In the whole scene there is
nothing to remind us of the western world ;
instead of tall forests, rapidly moving vehicles,
and houses with pointed roofs , which would
form the landscape in the new world, we see
GETHSEMANE, OLIVET, AND BETHANY . 111
a few scattering trees of insignificant height,
the slow-treading camel, and houses with flat
roofs and hemispheric domes.
Jerusalem has the appearance of an immense
cemetery ; though it was once a city of palaces,
we now behold a mass of ruins . Mount Zion ,
that was once covered with stately buildings,
is now " ploughed like a field ." Descending
from the minaret, we pass through a group of
mud huts , mostly composing the village, and
enter the narrow path leading to Bethany.
The distance between Jerusalem and Bethany,
is about two miles. It lies buried among
the spurs of Mount Olivet, and is called by the
Arabs " Lazareah" (the Lazarus) . On the
arrival of a traveller, an Arab lights a taper,
and leads him down a few steps into a dark
cave, said to be the tomb of Lazarus
scene of one of Christ's greatest miracles .
-the
Lazarus lay on a bed of sickness , and languishes
from day to day, until his wan cheek
shows that the hour of his departure is near
112 HADJI IN SYRIA.
at hand. The prayers of a fond sister are
hourly poured forth that help may come from
the arm, ever ready to extend relief alike to
friend and foe - and yet Jesus comes not.
Weary of the painful suspense, Mary and Martha
send to Jesus, saying, " Lord, he whom
thou lovest is sick ; " and his love for Lazarus
constrains him once more to visit Judea .
" One grief, one faith, O, sisters of the dead !
Was in your bosoms-there whose steps made fleet
By keen hope fluttering in the heart which bled,
Bore thee as wings , the Lord of Life to greet ;
And thou, that duteous in thy still retreat
Didst wait his summons , then with reverent love
Fall weeping at the blest Deliverer's feet ,
Whom e'en to heavenly tears thy woe could move :
And which to Him the All Seeing and All Just,
Was loveliest, that quick zeal, or lowly trust ?"
The death of Lazarus awakens in our Saviour
the tenderest pity, and he weeps over his
grave . But he no longer delays the happy
event that will turn this heaviness into joy.
GETHSEMANE, OLIVET, AND BETHANY. 113
He commands them to remove the stone that
covered the mouth of the cave . Then, with
a voice of Divine authority, he cries, " Lazarus,
come forth !" Lo, the voice of Jesus awakens
him from the sleep of death, and he comes
forth, with aid from no other source, before the
eyes
of the astonished multitude . With what
joy is he received from his grave by Mary and
Martha, and what amazement stamps the face
of every beholder !
We now resume the deeply worn path leading
from Bethany to Jerusalem .
Are we
alone ? No ; Christ, who so often wandered
over these hills, walks at our side -for these
scenes most vividly recall the incidents of his
life, and the very words that he spake - even
this fig tree that grows at the side of our path
reminds us of one of the lessons taught by our
adorable Master-a lesson of faith, " whereunto
wę do well to take heed ."
But, weary with walking and looking, every
sense is now painfully conscious of fatigue, and
10 *
114 HADJI IN SYRIA.
earnestly demands repose. Let us rest, then,
dear reader, upon this friendly rock beneath
the shade of the mulberry tree which bends
nearly to the ground.
To our right is the Chapel of the Prediction,
built upon the rock on which Christ
is said to have stood when he cried , " Oh !
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a hen gathereth
her chickens under her wings , and ye would
not ! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate."
Ah! He that spake as never man spake
uttered no prediction which has been more terribly
fulfilled . See ! there lies the " City of the
Great King" not more than half a mile from
our flinty divan-but how art thou fallen , O
Jerusalem ! Is that little town of only twenty
thousand inhabitants, and not three miles in
circumference, all that is left of that mighty
city which was once " the joy of the whole
GETHSEMANE, OLIVET, AND BETHANY. 115
earth ?" Surely her glory is departed , for she
is now but the neglected capital of a petty
Turkish province !
While refreshing ourselves with these delicious
mulberries, which grow here in such rich
abundance, shall we glance at the history of the
Holy City, as it passes in panoramic view before
us, from the past, through the present, into the
future ? Turn then to the west, and behold the
Priest of the Most High (Melchisedec) , who
founds the city in the year of the world 2023 ,
and calls it Salem ; fifty years after which, it
is captured by the descendants of Jebus, a son
of Canaan, and receives the name of Jerusalem-
a vision of peace. In the
597 B.C. year ,
Nebuchadnezzar overruns all Syria , enters Jerusalem,
plunders the Temple, and carries
away Daniel the prophet, and all the chief
citizens, to Babylon . But look ! seventy years
later may be seen these children of Israel returning
to their beloved city, led by Ezra,
their priest and scribe , who has been appointed
116 HADJI IN SYRIA.
governor by Cyrus. While peace yet continues,
the books of the Old Testament are collected
and arranged in their present form by Ezra,
the walls are rebuilt by Nehemiah , and the
Temple is partially restored . But now that
restless , ambitious man of Macedon pours in
his countless hordes upon this quiet people.
During the year 333 B. C., he receives the submission
of the city, and transplants one hundred
thousand Jews to his Egyptian colony .
Again and again is this doomed city pillaged
and almost destroyed by the Ptolemies and the
Persian kings .
Rome, in turn, becomes its conqueror , and
holds the world in check while the most wonderful
event occurs-" A child is born, upon
whose shoulder the government shall rest ;
and his name shall be called Wonderful , Counsellor,
The mighty God, The everlasting Father,
The Prince of Peace ; and of the increase of
his government there shall be no end !" He
lives a few years, during which time he accomGETHSEMANE
, OLIVET, AND BETHANY . 117
plishes the greatest work ever witnessed by
earth or Heaven-man's redemption—and dies
an atonement for all our sin . How wonderful
are the results ! Asia and Africa are now
open to receive his gospel, and the uttermost
parts of earth his glad-tidings of great joy.
Here is Christianity established , and from
hence flows forth its blessing as a mighty river.
But now persecutions rage in the vain
attempt to extinguish this Holy Light which
has sprung up in a dark place-the city is
doomed to destruction, and its people to dispersion
. Titus is the instrument of wrath,
and, during his siege, two hundred thousand
Jews perish by famine. They had spilt the
blood of Jesus , and cried , " His blood be upon
us and our children ." God answered their
prayer, and chose for himself another people.
Adrian follows Titus, and completes the work
of destruction, and the name of the Jewish
capital is changed and almost forgotten, until
the idols erected upon the alleged sepulchre
118 HADJI IN SYRIA.
of Christ are overthrown, and Constantine
once more establishes Christianity. But in
vain does Julian attempt to rebuild the Temple,
for balls of fire are seen to issue from the
foundations , dispersing the laborers and preventing
their designs . Destined to endure
still further troubles , it struggles with Persia,
and passes under the Mohammedan yoke.
This is too grievous to be borne-the Holy
City governed by the Turk ! This must not
be ! To the rescue ! Help ! Christians, to the
rescue !! Shall the City of our King be thus
despised and trampled under foot ? Ha ! they
come ! The voice of Peter the Hermit has
been heard ! See there ; Europe has sent her
chivalry-fair maidens and proud dames have
bidden their loved ones go and drive the Turk
from the Tomb of Christ . They come with
stout hearts and strong arms, and , headed by
the hermit Peter, and Godfrey de Bouillon ,
besiege the town ; and see, O joy ! the standard
of Christianity is waving on its walls !!
GETHSEMANE, OLIVET, AND BETHANY. 119
Alas ! victory soon takes its flight-crusade
follows crusade, and the city has many conquerors
both Christian and Turk ; and now the
crescent displaces the cross , and the Moslem
rule is still degrading this once noble and magnificent
kingdom .
"The Niobe of nations ! there she stands ,
Childless and crownless in her voiceless woe,
An empty urn within her withered hands,
Whose holy dust was scattered long ago."
The veil of the future is partly uplifted by
the hand of prophecy, and, as we turn from
the past, we see, coming from all directions,
the Hebrew race -long scattered throughout
the four quarters of the earth, yet still retaining
their indelible national characteristics, and
the same hope of returning to their ancient
city, and of their own prosperity in the land
of their forefathers .
Pollok, with almost prophetic eye and pen ,
portrays the scene in millennial strains :-
120 HADJI IN SYRIA.
" How fair the daughter of Jerusalem then !
How gloriously from Zion Hill she looked !
Clothed with the sun , and in her train the moon,
And on her head a coronet of stars ,
And girdling round her waist , with heavenly grace ,
The bow of mercy bright ; and in her hand
Immanuel's cross , her sceptre and her hope.
" Desire of every land ! the nations came,
And worshipped at her feet ; all nations came,
Flocking like doves : Columbia's painted tribes,
That from Magellan to the frozen Bay,
Beneath the Arctic , dwelt ; and drank the tides
Of Amazona, prince of earthly streams ;
Or slept at noon beneath the giant shade
Of Andes' Mount ; or roving northward, heard
Niagara sing, from Erie's billow down
To Frontenac, and hunted thence the fur
To Labrador : and Afric's dusky swarms ,
That from Morocco to Angola dwelt,
And drank the Niger from his native wells ,
Or roused the lion in Numidia's groves ;
The tribes that sat among the fabled cliffs
Of Atlas, looking to Atlanta's waves,
With joy and melody, arose and came.
Zara awoke and came, and Egypt came,
Casting her idol gods into the Nile .
Black Ethiopia, that, shadowless ,
GETHSEMANE, OLIVET, AND BETHANY . 121
Beneath the Torrid burned , arose and came .
Dauma and Medra, and the pirate tribes
Of Algeri, with incense came, and pure
Offerings, annoying now the seas no more.
The silken tribes of Asia, flocking, came,
Innumerous : Ishmael's wandering race, that rode
On camels o'er the spicy tract that lay
From Persia to the Red Sea coast ; the King
Of broad Cathay, with numbers infinite ,
Of many lettered casts ; and all the tribes
That dwelt from Tigris to the Ganges' wave,
And worshipped fire , or Brahma, fabled God ;
Cashmeres, Circassians , Banyans, tender race !
That swept the insect from their path, and lived
On herbs and fruits ; and those who peaceful dwelt
Along the shady avenue that stretched
From Agra to Lahore ; and all the hosts
That owned the crescent late, deluded long ;
The Tartar hordes , that roamed from Oby's bank,
Ungoverned, southward to the wondrous Wall .
The tribes of Europe came : the Greek , redeemed
From Turkish thrall, the Spaniard came and Gaul,
And Britain with her ships ; and , on his sledge ,
The Laplander, that nightly watched the bear
Circling the pole ; and those who saw the flames
Of Hecla burn the drifted snow ; the Russ,
Long whiskered, and equestrian Pole ; and those
Who drank the Rhine, or lost the evening sun
11
122 HADJI IN SYRIA.
Behind the Alpine towers ; and she that sat
By Arno, classic stream ; Venice and Rome,
Head quarters long of sin ! first guileless now,
And meaning as she seemed, stretched forth her hands ;
And all the isles of ocean rose and came,
Whether they heard the roll of banished tides ,
Antipodes to Albion's wave, or watched
The Moon, ascending chalky Teneriffe,
And with Atlanta holding nightly love .
The Sun, the Moon , the Constellations , came :
Thrice twelve and ten that watched the Antarctic sleep,
Twice six that near the Ecliptic dwelt, thrice twelve
And one that with the Streamers danced , and said
The Hyperborean ice guarding the Pole.
The East, the West, the South, and snowy North,
Rejoicing met and worshipped reverently
Before the Lord , in Zion's holy hill ;
And all the places round about were blessed .
" The flocks and herds o'er hill and valley spread ,
Exulting cropped the ever budding herb.
The desert blossomed and the barren sung ;
Justice and mercy, holiness and love,
Among the people walked , Messiah reigned ,
And Earth kept jubilee a thousand years .
But come ; the curtain of night is falling,
GETHSEMANE, OLIVET, AND BETHANY. 123
and unless we reach the city ere the muezzim's
cry, the gates will be closed against us.
As we enter the city his voice is heard, calling
all good Mahommedans to prayer :—
"Allah hoo ackbar- Allah hoo ackbar,
God is greater— God is greater,
Oo ishod la illa il Allah-
And bear testimony to one God-
Oo ishod la illa il Allah ,
And bear testimony to one God,
Oo inne Mohommed el Resûl Allah.
And testify that Mohammed is the Prophet of God."
Five times a day is this summons repeatedat
mid-day, in the afternoon, at sunset, after
dark , and, with this addition, at daybreak :-
"Es Salat ophdel min en- nom .
Prayer is better than sleep .
Es Sullah koom wa kheddin es Salat .
Rise up and offer Prayers."