
CHAPTER VI.
A SUMMER ON MOUNT OLIVET.
“ Mount Olivet , in sighs,
Spake mournfully-His midnight prayer was mine,
I heard it, I alone, -as all night long
Upward it rose with tears , for those who paid
His love with hatred ."
THE malaria arising from the debris of Jerusalem,
compels all Frank residents, who wish to
live out a full year, to pitch their tents in the
country, and remain outside the walls several
months of the warm season . Nothing is
more primitive than this way of living . Fami
lies supply themselves with the mere necessaries
of life , and occupy either tents or the ruins.
around the city. Never were we happier than
when living in this way on the western spur
of Mount Olivet, just opposite Jerusalem.
(124)


SUMMER RESIDENCEON OLIVET, OVERLOOKING THE KEDRON.

A SUMMER ON MOUNT OLIVET. 125
One is constantly reminded of the days of the
Patriarchs . The surrounding hills abound in
grapes, pomegranates, almonds, apricots, and
figs ; and these formed our principal articles of
food . Some of our Bedawin friends brought
us one day a bag of fruit from the neighborhood
of the Jordan, which they affirm are the
veritable apples of Sodom. They were beaten
into a powder, and whether the apple of Sodom,
or fruit of Gomorrah, it was very palatable .
In exchange, they earnestly pleaded for the
only looking- glass we had brought with us-of
the size of one's hand . From the sensation it
produced amongst them, it was evident they
had never seen one before. The eyes of the
women especially sparkled from very delight,
on surveying its reflection of the beads, coins,
and tassels with which their heads were decorated
. This, together with an electrical machine,
telescope, and the dispensary of medicines
, drew great numbers of them to our
abode. Scores of these sons of the desert
11 *
126 HADJI IN SYRIA.
might be seen winding around the mountain
every day, and a formidable company they
were each one mounted on his fine prancing
charger, and armed with all manner of deadly
instruments , a very walking battery . But,
however wild their aspect, owing to the potent
influence of medicine, we were always treated
by them with the greatest kindness .
The profound ignorance of these semi-civilized
beings , very naturally leads to the grossest
superstition, of which we often had instances .
Of medicinal knowledge , they have none- but
substitute all kinds of foolish and superstitious
practices in its stead . The application of the
red-hot iron is one of their most popular remedies
. A man fell one day from a house-top ;
a messenger was despatched on a fleet horse
for a Frank physician , who found him dangerously
wounded , and an Arab doctor applying a
red-hot iron, which, in their full belief in its
efficacy, afforded the greatest imaginable comfort
to the unfortunate man , and to his sympaA
SUMMER ON MOUNT OLIVET. 127
thizing friends ! At other times, the sick man
is laid near the tomb of some saint ; or a golden
case, containing a verse from the Koran, is hung
around his neck. Frequently a choice sentence
from the Koran is placed in a pipe and smoked,
and this they rely upon as a cure for the most
dangerous maladies ! Another popular mode
of treatment is a severe flogging !
When a paper of medicine is given them,
such is their ignorance, that they receive it
with the idea that both paper and medicine
must be swallowed !
During our first summer encampment, the
Pacha and his Hareem removed for the benefit
of their health to the village crowning the top
of the mountain. Great was the excitement,
when the long train of white sheets and attendants
were seen approaching the village. Rooms
had been already overspread with costly divans,
and the villagers had arrayed themselves
in holiday attire for their reception . Soon
after their arrival, as in etiquette bound, I
128 HADJI IN SYRIA.
called to pay my respects . The queen of the
hareem, who is a beautiful young Circassian,
handed me her own elegant narghileh to
smoke. I received many other marks of favor,
and was frequently assured that my visit af
forded them great pleasure .
They were not long in returning my visit ;
a messenger, however, was first sent, to say
that the ladies earnestly requested the gentlemen
to leave the house. (Curious ladies,
these ! ) This was, of course, readily complied
with, however reluctantly ; and we endeavored
to please our distinguished visitors . Some were
not well , and wanted medicine, which we freely
gave them, and they would fain have prostrated
themselves in gratitude ; indeed , it was sometimes
a difficult task to prevent a patient
from thus falling on the floor and kissing our
feet . Ever after this they were frequent visitors
at our encampment, notwithstanding its
humble appearance ; for it was a small , dilapidated
house, with two rooms and a stable, so
A SUMMER ON MOUNT OLIVET. 129
constructed that the stable was the hall of
entrance. A tent was pitched near the door,
of rather greater pretensions, being highly decorated
with figures of white and green . But
the privilege of living on this delightful mountain,
so full of soul-stirring associations, and of
treading daily the path so often trodden by the
feet of our Saviour, fully compensated for the
trivial privations we endured . For
" Here with His flock the sad Wanderer came-
These hills, He toil'd over in grief, are the same-
The founts where he drank by the wayside still flow,
And the same airs are blowing which breathed on his brow!"
Our simple manner of living gave additional
enjoyment ; and to contribute our mite of good
by administering to the sick, as well as to scatter
" the leaves which are for the healing of
the nations ; " and , with Bible in hand, to roam
over those sacred localities, were never-ending
sources of pleasure .
But one of the most attractive features of
130 HADJI IN SYRIA.
this simple life is the vivid everyday reproduction
of scriptural incidents .
How many passages are to be found in
which allusion is made to skin bottles, which
formed our most indispensable articles of
furniture ! The use of these still prevails extensively
throughout the East, and although
earthen jugs are also used, the former are
greatly preferred, and much more common.
They are made of the skin of a goat or a
sheep, and are so slightly mutilated by preparation
for use, that they retain almost the
exact shape of the animal from which they
were made . They are hung on the back of a
donkey, or more frequently a woman, and,
having been filled with water, thousands are
carried daily to the city. Abraham provided
Hagar with a bottle of water on sending her to
the desert ; but, properly rendered, might it not
be water-skin ? They are sometimes regularly
tanned into leather . This was no doubt the
material of the wine-bottles of the Gibeonitish


WOMAN WITH WATER-SKIN . TURKISH SOLDIER . ARAB SPINNING.

A SUMMER ON MOUNT OLIVET . 131
spies, who " did work wilily, and went and
made as if they had been ambassadors, and
took old sacks upon their asses , and winebottles
old and rent, bound up ." These bottles
, from constant use, become rent, and when
mended and patched give full proof of good
service and an ancient date . Hence, to put
new wine in these old bottles would be utter
folly, for the process of fermentation would
cause them to " break through," which would
not be the case while new and flexible .
Our camping-ground being very near the
well that supplies the village with water, I
often met the village maidens there, who repaired
thither to fill their jugs . Their usual
time for drawing water is just before nightfall,
and the office is always performed by the
women, as in the days of the Patriarchs ; for
we read that Eleazar, whom Abraham had
sent to obtain a wife for Isaac, made his
camels to kneel down without the city by a
well of water at the time of the evening, even
132 HADJI IN SYRIA .
the time that women go out to draw water.
And Rebekah, the very maiden whom he
sought, " came out with her pitcher upon her
shoulder, and she went down to the well and
filled her pitcher and came up." How often
have I called upon fancy to imagine the retreating
form of a Fellahah , with a vessel on
her head or shoulder, and decorated with bracelets
and ear-rings, to be the veritable Rebekah
of old !
A stone trough is generally placed near the
well, from which cattle are watered, and
around it a flock of goats or sheep is usually
gathered, as in the days of Jacob, who beheld
a well in the field, and " three flocks of sheep
lying by it." And in another particular they
agree with the wells of the days of the Patriarchs,
in having the mouth covered with a
large stone of great weight, requiring the
strength of two men sometimes to move it .
The usual method of drawing water is with a
jug or leathern bucket, let down by a rope
A SUMMER ON MOUNT OLIVET . 133
tied to its mouth ; and when the well has been
long in use, deep incisions are made by the
rope in the topmost lining stones . This
method was no doubt referred to by the
woman at the Well of Samaria, when she
said, " The well is deep, and I have nothing
to draw with . " It is also seen from Gen.
xxix. 8 , that the present manner of covering
the well is the same as that which made it
necessary for Rachel to require the greater
strength of Jacob to roll the stone away, when
she came to water the flocks of her father.
Among all orientals, even these simple Fellahin,
dress is a matter of great importance,
and they have a passionate fondness for ornaments
. A poor Fellah, with a mud hut for
his dwelling, and bread and water, literally,
for his food (varied now and then with a
cucumber) , decorates the head of his child
with gold and silver coins, which nothing less
than the prospect of starvation would induce
him to devote to other purposes . The women,
12
134 HADJI IN SYRIA.
too, wear this heavy head-gear, from which a
veil of coarse white cloth hangs over the
shoulder. The remainder of the dress is
nothing more than a blue gown, with sleeves
reaching to the ground, and a girdle around
the waist. We are always made aware of
their approach by the tinkling anklets, bracelets
, and head ornaments.
The dress of the men is equally simple ,
consisting of a white tunic bound around
the loins with a leathern girdle, a turban,
and sometimes an outer garment of coarse
material, striped, brown , and white, serving
the double purpose of an article of apparel
and a bed. And this enables us to understand
the mysterious command of Christ to
the sick man, to whom he said, after curing
him of his disease, " Take up thy bed and
walk." The dress of the Bedaweh differs but
little from that of the Fellahah, but we may
always distinguish the former by her tattooed
face and nose- ring . Neither is there any dif
A SUMMER ON MOUNT OLIVET. 135
ference between that of the men, except that
the Bedawin wears a gay striped handkerchief
of yellow and crimson bound around his head
with a cord, while the Fellah merely wears a
turban.
Our summer on Mount Olivet passed rapidly
away, but the emotions which there thronged
upon my soul will never be forgotten . Often
did I realize that I stood on " Holy Land," and
my heart went out in communion with the
" mighty dead." There, in that very pathway,
leading directly from the city to Jordan,
by way of Bahurim, David went up , weeping
as he fled from his vile rebellious son, and
looking back with wistful eye on his beloved
capital, worshipped at an oratory just there,
near our ruined castle. Up that path yonder
by Gethsemane, " David's greater Son," our
adorable Redeemer, often toiled at the close of
the day, as he left the heaven-abandoned city,
to seek repose in Bethany. 'Twas on this
mountain that the Shekinah lingered when it
136 HADJI IN SYRIA.
left the Temple ! Yonder, on that conical
summit, the last conference was held with the
Apostles, as the Son of man was parted from
them , and ascended on high, leading captivity
captive. And upon this same hallowed mountain
will his feet stand in " that day" when he
shall come to be admired of his saints, and to
take vengeance on his enemies . Sometimes I
envied the old trees which afforded shade for
the Saviour and the Apostles, and the breezes,
those " children of eternity," which refreshed
them after the toils and dangers of the day.
Often did I interrogate them, and all the
mountains round about Jerusalem : What
know ye of my Saviour, the Son of God ?
and my heart hushed its noisy throbbing when
I heard
" Judea's mountains from their breezy heights
Reply, -' We heard him, when he lifted up
His voice, and taught the people patiently,
Line upon line, for they were slow of heart .'
From its dark depths , the Galilean lake
Told hoarsely to the storm-cloud , how he dealt
A SUMMER ON MOUNT OLIVET. 137
Bread to the famished throng, with tender care,
Forgetting not the body, while he fed
The immortal spirit ;-how he stood and healed ,
Day after day, till evening shadows fell
Around the pale and paralytic train,
Lame, halt, and blind , and lunatic, who sought
His pitying touch."
" Even Calvary,
Pressed close its flinty lip, and shuddering bowed
In silent dread, remembering how the sun
Grew dark at noonday, and the sheeted dead
Came from their cleaving sepulchres, to walk
Among the living."
12 *