HADJI IN SYRIA .
CHAPTER I.
LAND HO ! LAND !!
SUCH was the joyful exclamation of the man
on the mast-head, as he caught the first glimpse
of a hazy streak in the distant horizon . " Land !"
And such land as it was, too ! not only terra
firma, but " Terra Santa." The land of patriarchs
and prophets-the land of apostles, martyrs,
and confessors-the Land of Emmanuel !
the Holy Land !
Adventurous, chivalrous, and romance- loving
Palmers of every age and clime have preceded
us in this pilgrimage ; but few, perhaps, have
(9)
10 HADJI IN SYRIA .
hailed this haven with purer delight than that
which now glowed in our bosoms .
The emotions with which the wearied pilgrim
voyager hails the first glimpse of " Canaan's
happy shore ," after encountering the perils of
two mighty seas, are surely akin to those experienced
by the disembodied spirit on entering
the haven of the Canaan above , after voyaging
in life's frail bark over the tempestuous ocean
of time .
A succession of frightful storms having wellnigh
destroyed our noble barque, we had left it
at Malta, and taken passage on board the screw
steamer " Brigand ." And intensely were we
longing to descry in the distance the dim blue
line that none but an experienced voyager
would suspect of being other than a cloud.
Day after day was a brave and active "tar "
sent to the top of the mast, with the hope of
hearing the longed-for sound of " Land ho !" At
last the cry was heard-a little while , and we
ourselves succeed in piercing the mists that for
SEA-FARING. 11
a time baffle all our efforts at getting a glimpse
of the shore . Soon trees and houses appear,
and then the moving people.
The ponderous anchor is gradually prepared
for a launch-a loud splash and clatter, and we
are safely anchored , no longer the sport of
howling winds and angry seas. And the dropping
of the anchor is by no means an unimportant
event in a traveller's experience- not
unlike the falling of the chains from a convict on
his release from the gloomy walls of his prison.
For have we not been held in " durance vile"
for weeks and months within our little cell-like
cabin, exercising all the hopes and fears that
agitate the breast of the prisoner on shorenow
cheered by a faint gleam of sunshine , and
now waiting in the breathless silence of fear to
be engulfed by mountain waves .
But it was not without some regret that we
bade adieu to the great deep over which we had
passed ; and, while longing to set foot on holy
land, I could but meditate upon its vastness
12
HADJI IN SYRIA .
and majestic flow, and give expression to my
thoughts in Byron's beautiful apostrophe :-
" Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean-roll !
Ten thousand fleets sweep over thee in vain ;
Man marks the earth with ruin- his control
Stops with the shore ; upon the watery plain
The wrecks are all thy deed , nor doth remain
A shadow of man's ravage, save his own,
When, for a moment, like a drop of rain,
He sinks into thy depths with bubbling groan ,
Without a grave, unknelled, uncoffined, and unknown.
"Thy shores are empires, changed in all save thee ;
Assyria, Greece, Rome, Carthage, what are they?
Thy waters wasted them while they were free,
And many a tyrant since ; their shores obey
The stranger, slave, or savage ; their decay
Has dried up realms to deserts ; not so thou ,
Unchangeable save to thy wild waves' play-
Time writes no wrinkle on thy azure brow-
Such as creation's dawn beheld , thou rollest now."
Who would fail to gaze in admiration at the
lovely landscape spread before us ! The snowy
peaks of Lebanon, " that goodly mountain,"
are in full view : the deep blue Mediterranean
DESIRED HAVEN. 13
is spotted here and there with sails of dazzling
white, and scarcely less white are the terraced
houses of Beirût, bathed in bright oriental sunshine,
and viewed through the clear ethereal
atmosphere peculiar to this classic and biblical
clime.
Beirût is one of the prettiest of eastern towns,
and just now has donned her gayest attirethis
being the hour when the inhabitants, in
their picturesque costumes, are grouped upon
every house-top, to enjoy the twilight hour and
the glory of the setting sun.
Lodgings are secured at " La Bellevue" hotel,
a half oriental, half European establishment ,
very popular withal from its beautiful situation
on the seashore . Following the example of
our neighbors , we resort to the roof of the
house, whence we can the better feast our eyes
on the novel scene . Everything reminds us
that we are in the land of the Bible, and our
first impulse leads us to take the holy record
in hand ; and while turning from one graphic
2
14 HADJI IN SYRIA.
description to another, we lift our eyes from
the page to gaze upon the reality.
Looking down into the court, two women are
seen grinding wheat, with just such a mill as
that to which our Saviour referred in his prophetic
denunciation : "Two women shall be
grinding at the mill, the one shall be taken , the
other left." It consists of two circular stones ,
the upper one having a handle, by which both
the women rapidly whirl the stone round and
round upon the lower one, which is immovable.
This is often accompanied by singing, which,
together with the noise made by the grinding,
explains the passage in Jeremiah, where the
Almighty declares He will take away from the
Jews
"The voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness ,
The voice of the bridegroom , and the voice of the bride,
The sound of the mill-stone, and the light of the candle ,
And the whole land shall be a desolation and an astonishment ."
The strangest of sights and sounds arrest our
attention ! But what fragmentary checkered
STRANGE SIGHTS . 15
pavement is this on which we are walkingwhite,
black, reddish, and bluish little cubes of
marble ? It is the floor of an old Roman mansion.
But, alas ! what a change has come over
this ancient seat of lore and chivalry- the
world-famed capital of the famous colony of
Julia Felix ! Where are the covenant Hebrews
that once dwelt here ? Where the proud Romans
that vanquished and enslaved them ?
Where the Persians, Greeks, Saracens, crusaders,
and hosts of its other captors ? All have
given way to the Ottoman Turk, " the worst of
the heathen." But what are these that slowly
approach us in the habiliments of the grave ?
Are they spectres or very ghosts ? A nearer
approach reveals the fact, however improbable
in the distance, that they belong to the category
of my own sex-booted and pantalooned
though they be ! One shudders at their sepulchral
appearance, completely enveloped as they
are in those white sheets . And who are these
in long gowns, gaudy sashes, morocco slippers,
16 HADJI IN SYRIA.
and beautiful tiaras ? Well, these turn out
to be the rulers of the land-" the turbaned
Turk. "
What jargon in the
What motley groups crowd the streetsquadrupeds
as well as bipeds ! Surly Turks,
stolid Arabs, hardy Druses, wily Maronites ,
travellers from the ends of the earth , and here
and there a poor despised Jew- the rightful
owner of the land .
bazaars ! a very Babel ! Who can help laughing
outright to see the Frank mounted on that
little donkey , with his legs bent at right angles
to keep his feet above ground ; and the poor
woman astride on the mule-but we will soon
be accustomed to the sight. Fine Arab steeds
are prancing about , impatient of restraint ; and
there goes a fleet of five-and- twenty heavilyfreighted
" ships of the desert ," piloted by one
little donkey, going down the coast of Phoenicia .
There goes an Arab porter trudging along with
a veritable barrel of American flour on his back .
What admirable beasts of burden are these
STRANGE LANGUAGE AND FASHION . 17
domesticated wild men of the desert-the posterity
of Ishmael !
Of the ten thousand words I have heard from
these various tribes , not one syllable have I
understood . Be not surprised, then , that when
I heard a child cry in real good English, I could
but feel a momentary satisfaction in being reminded
ofmy country by this imp of Mohammed,
so lustily expressing his sentiments in the very
language used by the little urchins of America !
Still more satisfactory was it to find the canine
citizens giving expression to their views and
feelings of matters and things in the same
classic lingo that distinguishes the " friend of
man" in occidental climes !
The most singular fancy that one meets
with, is the head-dress of the Druse women,
which is assumed at the nuptial ceremonynever
more to be laid aside . A long silver
horn projects from the forehead , over which a
white veil is hung, nearly covering her person.
This is certainly a more comfortable way of
2 *
18 HADJI IN SYRIA.
concealing the face, than the closely drawn
veil of the Turkish lady, inasmuch as the horn
gives room for a free circulation of air. To
the base of this heavy fixture, a quantity of
silver balls, silk tassels, and other trinkets, are
hung. The horn is about two feet in length,
and is never even temporarily removed, being
fastened to a cushion, which is tightly tied to
the head. The sight of this strange head-gear
forcibly brings to mind several passages of
Scripture, showing its ancient origin :-1 Sam.
ii . 1 , And Hannah prayed and said, My heart
rejoiceth in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in
the Lord ." Psalm lxxxix. 24 , " And in my
name shall his horn be exalted ." In another,
" I said to the wicked , Lift not up the horn ;"
and again, " And in thy favor our horn shall
be exalted." And Job says, " I have defiled
mine horn in the dust." These (one is strongly
inclined to believe) referred to the same ornament,
probably in use among the daughters of
Shem. One can't help believing they must be
ORIGIN OF THE DRUSES . 19
heartily tired of the state of single life, to
assume this inconvenient burden, in addition to
the thousand and one cares and anxieties that
go to make up the sum and substance of connubial
bliss among oriental females ; it is highly
gratifying to learn, however, that the missionaries
in Beirût and Mount Lebanon are doing,
and indeed have done, much to ameliorate the
moral, mental, and physical condition of this
strange class of people , who originated in the
following manner :-
After the death of Mohammed, many disputes
arose amongst his followers, causing great dissension
, and ultimately giving rise to many
sects and creeds . History records no less than
sixty, each having a leader or an apostle, who
zealously disseminated his own peculiar doctrines
. At this time a ruler arose amongst
them whose career was one of madness and
folly. Among his extravagant actions, we
read that he compelled all Jews and Christians ,
among whom he had power, to renounce their
20 HADJI IN SYRIA.
religion and adopt his own. Such was his
hatred for Mohammed, that he ordered his
khalifs to be publicly cursed in the mosques,
and prohibited the pilgrimage to Mecca, as well
as fasting and the five Mohammedan prayers .
Wishing one day to indulge in a piece of innocent
sport, he caused the half of Cairo to be
burnt, and the remaining half to be plundered !
At another time , he caused an entire cessation
in the manufacture of women's slippers , which
he considered an indispensable precautionary
measure to compel the women to remain within
doors.
He had sixteen thousand followers, and a
close friend in the person of Mohamed- ben- Israel,
whom he styled his prophet. This prophet
was taken into especial favor because he
acknowledged his master to be God himselfbut
not so with the people. They frowned
upon his madness, and finally assassinated both
ruler and prophet . This rash act, however,
had not the desired effect of checking the proDRUSES.
21
gress of their opinions. A large society was
formed, taking the name of Druses, from El
Dorzi , the first and most zealous preacher who
continued to disseminate the doctrines of their
massacred ruler . These strange people have
since undergone many changes. At the beginning
of the seventeenth century, they obtained
great power under their talented leader, Fakerel-
din or Fakardin, who, after a most eventful
life, was strangled A. D. 1631 , by order of the
Sultan.
The Druses are now living quietly, and have
for their capital a town of about five thousand
inhabitants ; their number throughout the
country being two hundred thousand . Travellers
tell us that they lead a very simple life .
The palace of their chief or Emir, however, is
said to be very elegant, having marble floors
and splendid tapestries . Among their peculiarities,
they do not condemn marriage between
brothers and sisters ; and , unlike the Mohammedans,
allow the consumption of pork and wine.
22.
HADJI
IN
SYRIA
.
As for their religious ceremonies , nothing
can be said of them, for their greatest care is
to meet together in secrecy, and thus involve
their form of worship in mystery. It is known ,
however, that the greater part of the nation
deny the doctrine of a future state .
The Maronites , some of whom are also to be
seen in Beirût, took their name from their prophet
Maron, who was held by them in such
veneration, that they affirm miracles to have
been wrought in virtue of his remains. They
are divided into two classes , the sheikhs and the
common people, who are very hospitable, keeping
open houses for the entertainment of
strangers. They condemn a plurality of wives ,
and in religious matters principally hold the
doctrines of Rome. This is said to be the only
sect which is allowed to have bells to all their
chapels-a privilege which, though generally
denied other churches throughout the Turkish
dominions, is yet tolerated in most of the convents
; and in some of them a suspended bar of
OUR DRAGOMAN. 23
wood is made to subserve the purposes of a
bell.
But interesting as the city of Berytus unquestionably
is, there are localities further on
far more so ; and now we begin to think of
taking up our line of pilgrimage .
Joseph, the hero of Mr. Brown's admirable
" Yuseph," with his huge bundle of letters of
recommendation , presents himself, with the
assurance that he will be the most faithful of
dragomans , should we be pleased to engage his
services. A glance at his bristling girdle suffices
to elicit from us a favorable answer . It
is overflowingly supplied with dirks , sabres ,
and pistols ; accoutrements to which no one ,
in anticipation of a passage through a wild
region of country, alleges the slightest objection.
Thus equipped, and mounted on his
fiery Arabian steed, we deem him a match for
half a dozen Bedawin : a most consoling thought,
in view of the double capacity in which he is
about to act, as guard and dragoman to Jeru24
HADJI IN SYRIA.
salem . He wears the usual gay costume of
the Greek Arabs. A tarbouch of bright crimson,
a jacket of purple, richly embroidered with
gold, a vest of delicate green embroidered with
silks, a white plaited skirt, twenty yards wide ,
and boots of bright yellow morocco, complete
his attire .
With an unmistakeable air of self-importance
, he takes upon himself the command of
our cavalcade , on starting for Jerusalem. To
hear the deafening tones in which he gives
orders and directions to the awe-inspired muleteers,
you would conceive him to be the Pacha
himself—a conception not altogether foreign to
his own mind ! His accomplishments are varied
as the contents of his girdle : there is no
better cook to be found in the land ; no one
can place a lady on her horse with more grace
and gallantry ; and the country does not produce
a greater linguist , speaking fluently, as
he does, no less than six or seven languages.
Bravery is another attribute for which he is
ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF DRAGOMAN. 25
equally renowned . The most wonderful accounts
of his daring exploits with the marauding
Bedawin, are told far and near ; whether
true or not is hard to tell, in this heavenabandoned
land, where truth is so lightly
esteemed and rare.
3
จอ เร่
คา
ร
JEWISH QUARTER SHEKEL.