CHAPTER XI.
VISIT TO THE TOMB OF DAVID.
EARLY one morning, during the feast of
Rhamadan, I was called to the parley room to
see one of my friends, who rejoices in the name
of the great Lawgiver of Israel. This liberalized
little sprig of nobility having become rather
a frequent visiter, I was at first inclined to excuse
myself; but remembering he had lately
hinted at the possibility of my gaining an
entrance into the Tomb of David, I immediately
obeyed the summons, and was soon
convinced by his mysterious manner, that my
pleasing anticipations were not unfounded.
The door was closed and the most profound
secrecy enjoined . Then laying his ponderous
turban on the divan beside him , doffing his
(178)
VISIT TO THE TOMB OF DAVID . 179
slippers , and crossing his legs, he proceeded to
disclose the nature of his errand . In short, I
was informed that his amiable and affectionate
sister was ready for an adventure, and being in
the same mood, we were not long in reaching
Turfendah's home, where we found her busily
engaged in selecting clothes , suitable for my
disguise . A maid was summoned, at whose
mercy I was placed, and she forthwith proceeded
to dress me in a robe and trousers of
the finest Damascus silk, a girdle of cashmere,
and tunic of light blue, embroidered in silver
flowers. My hands were already dyed with
henna, having undergone this process on the
occasion of a similar adventure in the Mosque
of Omar, and they still retained the deep orange
hue, without which my disguise would have
been incomplete . My face too was pretty
deeply tanned from a residence of several
years, under a burning Syrian sun, which was
quite an addition to my Turkish appearance .
The sheet, veil , and slippers, came in due order,
180
HADJI IN SYRIA.
and having secreted my pencil and sketchbook,
we sallied forth, accompanied by Turfendah's
favorite slave .
The reputed Tomb of David is just outside
the Zion Gate , hard by the Coenaculum. It is
surrounded by an irregular pile of buildings ,
and surmounted by a dome and minaret. In
the interior are some of the most grotesque
architectural embellishments imaginable, on the
capitals of its ancient pillars-the remains of
the times of the crusaders. Just think-the
frightful owl occupying the place of the classic
acanthus and the mythic lotus ! We passed
through several halls and corridors , evidently
of the style of the Quixotic era of the crusaders'
domination, before reaching the consecrated
apartment, whose entrance is guarded by
double iron doors. An old Derwish was pros
trate before the door on the cold stone floor .
Not being privileged as ourselves to enter the
sacred precincts, he was content with gazing at
the tomb through the iron bars, for it is a rare
VISIT TO THE TOMB OF DAVID. 181
thing that even a Mussulman ecclesiastic can
gain admittance-my companion and her family
enjoying this privilege only on account of their
near relationship to the curator of the tomb.
Our slave was despatched for the key, which
she had no difficulty in obtaining, on the plea
that her mistress wished to pray on the holy
spot. But what was my consternation on seeing
another slave return with her ! I confess
that I trembled , and was thinking I had better
leave
my awkward slippers behind in case of
retreat , as they would greatly impede my progress,
and thereby cause me to lose my head !
But, after peering under my veil, and asking
who I was, she seemed satisfied with the careless
reply of Turfendah, that I was a friend of
hers from Stamboul, and then invited us up
stairs to see the keeper's hareem. The invitation
was very graciously received by Dahudeiah,
the wife of the young Effendi ; who is always
glad to vary the purgatory of a life with her
husband by a visit to this place ; for I can
16
182 HADJI IN SYRIA.
testify, from personal observation , that the
young Effendi lords it over her in true Oriental
style . But Turfendah , thinking it more politic
to decline, regretted " she was unfit to make
visit just at that time, feeling much exhausted
from fasting." To our great relief the slave
now left, and having dismissed the Derwish,
the doors were closed and doubly locked .
The room is small in dimensions , but gorgeously
furnished by the Sultan , I am told,
who renews the tapestry every few years.
The tomb is an immense sarcophagus of stone,
covered with greenish satin tapestry embroidered
with gold . To this a piece of black
velvet is attached, with inscriptions from the
Koran. A satin canopy of red, green, blue,
and yellow stripes , hangs over the tomb, and
tapestry of velvet richly embroidered in silver
covers a door in one end of the room , leading
to a cave immediately underneath.
candlesticks and golden vessels containing rose
water, stand in different parts of the room, and
Silver
VISIT TO THE TOMB OF DAVID. 183
a lamp hangs in the window, which is kept
constantly burning, and whose wick, though
saturated with oil, and I dare say a most nauseous
dose, my companion eagerly swallowed,
muttering a prayer with the usual attitudes of
deep humility. After prostrating herself many
times, she raised the covering of the tomb and
rapturously kissed it. The ceiling is vaulted ,
the walls covered with blue porcelain in floral
figures, while the floor is of highly polished
marble of various colors . Having remained
here an hour or more, and completed my
sketch, we left in high glee at our success ; but
much greater was my rejoicing when I found
myself at home-once more out of danger and
out of my awkward costume.