
CHAPTER VII.
VISIT TO THE JORDAN AND THE DEAD SEA.
It is considered unsafe to make the trip to
the Jordan and the Dead Sea without a guard ,
and even then, one is in danger of " falling
among thieves" and murderers of the most desperate
kind -the merciless Bedawin, " whose
hand is against every man." All our fears and
misgivings, however, are dispelled on the arrival
of the guard, who are sufficiently warlike in
appearance to quell the fears of the most timid.
Crossing the Valley of Jehosaphat, and then
Mount Olivet, and passing the now palmless
Bethany, and the Apostles' Fountain, we soon
enter upon a waste so dreary, so entirely bereft
of one spot of verdure , that it completely fulfils
the idea conveyed by the word " wilderness ."
(138)
VISIT TO THE JORDAN AND DEAD SEA . 139
Who would not at once recognise in this widespreading
desert, the Wilderness of Judea ?
what a wild and fearful aspect it presents !
"Here rocks alone, and ceaseless sands are found,
And faint and sickly winds for ever howl around ."
It was on one of these barren hills, or in one
of these dark ravines, that the good Samaritan
attended so faithfully to the wounded Jew,
whom the thieves had left in such a deplorable
condition. On one of these towering mountains,
Mount Quarantina, the Saviour was
tempted for forty days and forty nights .
Rejoiced are we when our fatiguing ride,
along the sides of the steep and craggy mountains,
is ended at the banks of the Dead Sea,
which we find just as mysterious as we have
been led to expect by the accounts of travellers.
The taste of the water is pungent and bitter,
and its buoyancy so great, that one can float
along with head and shoulders above water ;
and with a log of wood for a pillow, could
140
HADJI IN SYRIA.
leisurely read a newspaper. To sink is impossible-
for, as Josephus well remarks, " no one
was ever yet drowned in the Dead Sea."
Its surface is many hundred feet below that
of the Mediterranean Sea, and at different seasons
its level varies from ten to fifteen feet, the
evaporation being very great . A few freshwater
streams flow into it, and the fish which
are thus brought in are strangled in its briny
waters, and float dead upon the surface . Recent
analysis gives us, in one hundred grains
of this water, twenty-five of salts , principally
of soda and magnesia- while the water of the
ocean has only ten. Being already saturated,
common salt will not dissolve in it, and it
is said to preserve vegetable and animal substances
from decay. At its southern extremity
is a ridge of rock salt, from one hundred to one
hundred and fifty feet high, and nearly five
miles long. The Arabs tell us that Lot's wife
may be found here transformed into a pillar of
salt, and point out a column of crystallized rockVISIT
TO THE JORDAN AND DEAD SEA. 141
salt, sixty feet high and forty in circumference,
a lasting monument of female disobedience and
improper indulgence in that characteristic trait
of our sex-curiosity . But we cannot believe
all that these Arabs say, for they too often indulge
in exaggerations, and delight in pointing
out localities and objects which exist only in
their imaginations.
About nightfall we reach Jericho, and pass
the dreariest of nights within the walls of its
filthy dilapidated castle . The city of palms
was long since destroyed- its site is now
marked by this ancient tower, a few mud huts,
and heaps of rubbish . How deplorable the
change, and complete the desolation following
the curse of an offended God ! Who would
remain unmoved on ground to which such interest
attaches , as that of this memorable spot ?
It was in this vicinity that the children of
Israel first entered the promised land. On
these craggy mountains the hosts of Israel
were encamped, when their leader commanded
142 HADJI IN SYRIA.
them to possess themselves of the promised
land : “ Go over, thou and all this people, into
the land which I do give thee, even the children
of Israel." How melancholy to see the
direful change caused by the backslidings and
disobedience of this people !
After passing over this ground, the first
object of note is the Fountain of Elisha, whose
bitter waters the prophet miraculously made
sweet. A few miles more terminates our ride,
and brings us to the Jordan. In common with
every traveller, we are disappointed on seeing
its narrow muddy stream. We alight at the
very spot handed down by tradition as the
place of Christ's baptism-a retired part of the
stream, bordered with tall luxuriant shrubbery
and a few scattered trees .
On these banks were assembled the vast
concourse of people attending the Forerunner's
preaching ; and He who knew no sin must
needs also be baptized of him—an honor which
John , in his humility and reverence for Christ,
VISIT TO THE JORDAN AND DEAD SEA . 143
was loth to accept . But a word only was
needed from his Master to gain his consent.
On hearing the words , " Suffer it to be so now,
for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness
, " he baptized him ; and, when they
emerged from the water, " Lo , a voice from
Heaven , This is my beloved Son , in whom I am
well pleased ;" and the eternal Spirit descended
upon His sacred head . Hard, indeed , do we
find it to realize that we are standing on
ground memorized by so glorious a spectacle !
But alas ! how different now !
" On Jordan's banks the Arab's camels stray,
On Sion's hill the False One's votaries pray,
The Baal-adorer bows on Sinai's steep-
Yet there—even there-Oh, God ! thy thunders sleep .
There where thy finger scorched the tablet stone !
There where thy shadow to the people shone ,
Thy glory shrouded in its garb of fire :
Thyself none living see and not expire !
Oh ! in the lightning let thy glance appear !
Sweep from his shivered hand the oppressor's spear :
How long by tyrants shall thy land be trod !
How long thy temple worshipless, Oh , God !"
144 HADJI IN SYRIA.
The rainy season having now commenced,
we must leave our rustic abode for our city
residence on Mount Zion, which we do with
extreme reluctance, unwilling to exchange our
rural encampment and pleasant walks for the
more confined air, and the greater restraint of
a walled city. But we are consoled with the
knowledge that person and property are less
exposed to the wandering tribes of Bedawin
Arabs from beyond the Jordan, and are free
from the snakes and scorpions which are so
numerous on Mount Olivet.
The English and Germans, who have been
spending the summer in tents outside the
walls, have been compelled to beat a precipitate
retreat into the city on account of the
petty wars between the various tribes of Arabs
in this vicinity ; and we had, sometime ago,
held a council with the chief men of Jebel Tûr
(village of Ascension) , who are also at war, as
to the propriety of remaining any longer in our
exposed position ; but had determined to run
VISIT TO THE JORDAN AND DEAD SEA. 145
the hazard of a longer abode , on receiving
their solemn assurance that, if we were to
walk up that valley between them and the Isaweians,
with whom they expected there to
fight , the next day, all firing would cease ! So
much for the potent influence of medicine, and
their reverence for the Hakeem, or Physician !
13