
CHAPTER XVIII.
THE JEWS.
" Jerusalem, thy prayer is heard :
HIS BLOOD IS ON THY HEAD !"
THERE are no people more worthy of our
attention and regard than the people of Israel,
God's own chosen race. And those inhabiting
Jerusalem claim not only our serious consideration,
but most heart-felt pity . Their condition
is a sad and wonderful verification of the sure
word of prophecy, which long ago doomed
them to their present state of degradation and
woe. They are now beginning to come to Jerusalem
in great numbers ; and are supported
while there mainly by contributions from
abroad, amounting to the miserable pittance of
a few paras a day for each person .
Yet they
(263)
264 HADJI IN SYRIA .
are quite happy and contented , so long as they
enjoy the privilege of treading the land of their
forefathers , and living on the sacred soil of
their beloved Mount Zion . The heart of the
lover of Israel is often made to bleed when
witnessing instances of the tyranny exercised
over them by their despotic lords , the Turks ;
such as a poor old Jew being pelted with stones
by the little Turkish boys in the street . The
little scamps are greatly amused with the sport ;
and , instead of meeting with a severe rebuke,
they are rewarded with encouragement from
their seniors ; at whose instigation , indeed, the
sport is generally commenced.
No Jew is allowed to enter the Church of
the Holy Sepulchre ; and, indeed , should one
be seen even passing through the court, he is
instantly attacked by an infuriated mob of
Christians, who if they allow him to escape
with his life, he has great occasion to thank
them, as they are fully empowered to kill him
by express firman of the Sultan . He is set


GROUP OF JEWS AND JEWESSES .

THE JEWS. 265
free only on condition of submission to the
practice his soul abhors—of kissing a crucifix
of the despised Nazarene, or an image of the
Virgin Mary. One privilege, however, is
granted the poor Jew of Jerusalem , upon
which he places inestimable value : that of
performing his devotions close by the remains
of the magnificent walls that once surrounded
the Temple . For this favour, they at one
time paid an enormous price to the Turks,
who own not only this spot, but nearly all of
the Holy City. And there they resort at all
times, but particularly on Friday, to weep and
lament that their Temple is no more.
Here, too, assemble multitudes of the matrons
and maids of Israel, to pour forth their bitter
lamentations and scalding tears through the
crevices of that portion of the wall nearest the
site of their beloved but unapproachable Temple
; " deeply wailing, deeply wailing that the
daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard,
as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers ; as
23
266 HADJI IN SYRIA.
a besieged city." But so down-trodden , impotent,
and helpless are they, that it is no uncommon
thing for " certain lewd fellows of the
baser sort," of Turkish , Arab, and Christian
pedigree, so to annoy them, that they are glad
to ensconce themselves in their crowded and
comfortless tenements on Mount Zion.
Fervent and many are the kisses they imprint
upon these hallowed stones ; and sad and
plaintive are the touching words of the Karaite
Jews :-
Cantor. On account of the palace which is laid waste,
People. We sit down alone and weep .
Cantor. On account of the Temple which is destroyed,
People. We sit down alone and weep .
Cantor. On account of the walls which are pulled down,
People. We sit down alone and weep .
Cantor. On account of our majesty which is gone,
People. We sit down alone and weep.
Cantor. On account of our great men who have been cast
down,
People. We sit down alone and weep.
Cantor. On account of the precious stones which are burned,
People. We sit down alone and weep.
THE JEWS . 267
Cantor. On account of the priests who have stumbled ,
People. We sit down alone and weep .
Cantor. On account of our kings who have despised him ,
People. We sit down alone and weep .
SECOND CHANT.
Cantor. We beseech thee have mercy upon Zion.
People. Gather the children of Jerusalem .
Cantor. Make haste the Redeemer of Zion .
People. Speak to the heart of Jerusalem.
Cantor. May beauty and majesty surround Zion .
People. And turn with thy mercy to Jerusalem.
Cantor. Remember the shame of Zion.
People. Make new again the ruins of Jerusalem.
Cantor. May the royal government shine again over Zion .
People. Comfort those who mourn at Jerusalem .
Cantor. May joy and gladness be found upon Zion.
People. A branch shall spring forth at Jerusalem .
The Tomb of Rachel is another spot held by
them in great veneration ; and I envy neither
the head nor the heart of the stranger who can
pass from Jerusalem to Bethlehem without
deviating a few hundred yards from the stony
path to muse awhile, and perhaps drop a tear
at the tomb of the ill-fated but " beautiful and
268 HADJI IN SYRIA.
well-favored" Rachel. The pillar set upon her
grave, thirty-five long centuries and a generation
ago, has long since crumbled into dust, or,
more probably, been chipped into fragmentary
amulets ; but the venerated spot is still marked ,
and no doubt correctly indicated by a picturesque
mausoleum, containing two rooms, the
innermost of which is the consecrated sanctum
where her idolized remains lie interred beneath
a rude oblong tomb of plastered stones, four or
five feet in height ; Ephrath, or Ephratah, being
but a mile or two distant ; for " she was
buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem
;" " and there was but a little way to go
to Ephrath ." Ramah, in the Hebrew, means
an eminence, and it was doubtless on the top
of the intervening hill in the coasts of Bethle
hem , and not at Ramley, near Joppa, as Charlotte
Elizabeth imagines (in that admirable
production of her pen, " Judah's Lion" ) , that a
" voice was heard" -lamentations and bitter
weeping-" Rachel weeping for her children,

sale
.of
SOL
RATCOHTMEOHBLFE.
Y
TO

THE JEWS . 269
refusing to be comforted because they were
not."
How touchingly is the traveller reminded of
that soul-rending cry, in passing this cherished
monument of the mother of millions of the
noblest race on earth- where , beneath its
dome and around its walls, he hears the plaintive
wailings of the daughters of this revered
" mother in Israel." But they weep not for
the hecatombs of innocent infants, sacrificed in
the vain attempt of Herod the Great (monster
of cruelty) to destroy the infant Messiah ; for
that event they profess to disbelieve . They
are weeping for their own state of hopeless
degradation, and the misery that has come
upon them. Well did our adorable Redeemer
say to certain devoted females, who had ministered
to him of their substance , and, faithful to
the bitter end, sorrowfully followed Him to
Golgotha, " Weep not for me, but weep for
yourselves and your children." Oh ! the untold
miseries that have come upon the degraded
23 *
270 HADJI IN SYRIA .
daughter of Zion ! Fountainless indeed must
be the eye that can witness the harrowing
anguish of mind and contortion of body manifested
around this tomb, and shed no tear.
Harder than the nether mill- stone, and " deaf
to pity's soul-subduing cry ," that bosom that
can remain unmoved amid such a scene of
wailing, lamentation , and despair.
Travellers have full liberty to visit the synagogues,
and seldom fail to avail themselves of
the privilege. But oh ! how painful to witness
the clamor, confusion , and utter want of solemnity
with which their worship is conducted !
The women are not allowed to participate in
the service, or even to sit in the body of the
synagogue, but are allotted a place in the
gallery, which is partitioned off by lattice
work. Part of the service consists in a proclamation
by a crier, who loudly proclaims the
merits of the law, and offers the privilege of
carrying it from the ark to the reader's stand
to the highest bidder ; and sometimes a large
THE JEWS. 271
sum is given for the honor, though usually the
privilege is sold for about one dollar. During
the whole of their service, whether chanting
or reading from the law, they continually sway
their bodies to and fro . This practice they
satisfactorily account for by citing one of the
Psalms, where David says, " All my bones
shall praise thee !"
Oh ! that these walls may soon echo the glad
sound of praises to Christ their true Messiah ,
whom they still continue to reject, to their
temporal woe as well as eternal condemnation ;
for to this rejection may be ascribed all the
evils and misery to which they are subject .
How fervently should we pray that their hardness
of heart may be taken away from them !
for then, and not until then, are we to realize
the promise that, " the fullness of the Gentiles
being come in, the blindness that has happened
to them in part shall be removed, and they
shall be graffed into their own olive tree ."
The feasts of Tabernacles, Purim, and Pass272
HADJI IN SYRIA.
over are still strictly observed . During the
feast of Tabernacles, the Jewish quarter presents
a very pretty and rural sight. As in
olden days, booths of brush and shrubbery are
erected in the courts and gardens, or on the
roof of every house, and form pleasant retreats
for the family. The afternoon of each day
finds every household gathered in their cool
and refreshing shade- some, with Talmud in
hand, stand with their faces toward the Temple
and chant, while those preferring a less rigid
observance indulge in fruits, sherbet, and
pipes .
The passover is sadly changed . Instead of
killing a lamb and observing the solemn ritual
of the Bible, every family slaughters a chicken ,
which is eaten with salt , vinegar, and herbs.
Still more absurd, and at the same time
painful and disgusting, is their manner of celebrating
the feast of Purim, when every Jew,
both young and old, male and female, is required
to become so intoxicated as to be unable
THE JEWS. 273
to distinguish between cursing Haman and
blessing Mordecai . How deplorable is such a
departure from the law of Moses, which indeed
is now almost entirely discarded by them !
And this is the sad but true story of the
fallen state of the house of Israel ! Nor is
their temporal welfare better than their spiritual
. Greater wretchedness and poverty than
that in which they are sunk could not be conceived.
Their quarter is the most filthy,
miserable part of the city. The hardest heart
is moved to pity on visiting their dark, closelypacked
hovels ; for although their numbers are
so great, their quarter occupies but a small
portion of the city.
There are a few Karaite Jews among them ,
who reject the Talmud ; consequently the persecution
they receive at the hands of their
talmudical brethren is very great. By way of
ineffaceably impressing this deadly hate on the
hearts of their children , they are early taught
that should they ever see a Christian and a
274 HADJI IN SYRIA .
Karaite Jew in the act of drowning, they must
overlook the Karaite and save the Christianhateful
as he is !
Should a Jew at the head of a family become
a Christian, his wife , children, and property
are taken from him, and he is in various
ways bitterly persecuted , thus greatly enhancing
the difficulties in the way of converting
them to Christianity.
What an awful lesson of unbelief and hardness
of heart do we behold in this people, cast
out, as it were, from the common rights and
sympathies of all, and alienated from the inheritance
of their fathers ! And how earnest
should be our endeavors to convert them, seeing
that such glorious promises are predicated
upon their salvation ! For when the " Redeemer
shall come out of Zion, and turn away
ungodliness from Jacob, all Israel shall be
saved, and the gentile year of jubilee shall
also arrive for if the fall of them be the
riches of the world, and the diminishing of
THE JEWS . 275
them the riches of the gentiles , how much
more their fullness ? And if the casting away
of them be the reconciling of the world, what
shall the receiving of them be but life from the
dead ?"