CHAPTER XIX.
THE CHRISTIANS.
THE Christians of Jerusalem are divided into
many sects the Roman and Greek Catholics,
Armenians, Copts, Syrians, and Abyssinians.
Each of these sects has its separate chapel in
the Church of the Holy Sepulchre , besides
others scattered over the city. The " Scarlet
Lady" is well represented here, as elsewhere,
and has made good use of her overflowing
coffers , in erecting churches and other public
edifices. The Roman Catholic monks are
generally the originators of the traditions with
which the Holy City abounds ; shall we , therefore
, engage this polite old monk as our cicerone
during a visit to the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre, with every part of which he is no
doubt familiar ?
(276)
THE CHRISTIANS . 277
We find both the court and building thronged
with pilgrims from all parts of the world, engaged
in their devotional exercises . On a raised
divan near the door the Turkish guards are
seated, who make it their business to keep
these Christians in order ; and not unfrequently
are their instruments of punishment brought
into requisition during the festivities of Easter ,
when nothing is more common than a riot
among the unruly multitude within . A short
distance from the door is the stone of unction—
a marble slab upon which Christ is said to have
been laid for his anointing . A little further is
a circular enclosure , marking the spot occupied
by the holy women when witnessing the crucifixion
. The Holy Sepulchre itself is a small
building of white marble , standing beneath the
dome of the church , and overhung by a starspangled
canopy. It is crowned with a cupola,
and the doorway is supported by slender spiral
columns. Within, the air is laden with the
perfume of flowers, and the ceiling hung with
24
278
HADJI IN SYRIA .
gold and silver lamps-the gifts of kings and
princes . This too is thronged with pilgrims.
Some, prostrating themselves on the floor, rub
their foreheads in the dust of the pavement,
while others press their lips upon the cold
marble of the tomb.
We now ascend by a flight of steep steps to
the scene of the crucifixion ; a gaudy chapel,
in which our guide points out a fissure in the
rock, under the altar, caused , he tells us, by
the earthquake that occurred at the death of
Christ. Descending into the subterranean part
of the church, we enter the chapel in which
the cross was found. Here , it is said, the
Empress Helena caused workmen to dig for
the three crosses , which, after a diligent search,
they are said to have found, and were enabled
to select that on which Christ was crucified, by
its miraculous powers of healing.
The Tomb of Joseph of Arimathea, is also
shown. Indeed, the traditions connected with
this huge pile of buildings are endless ; and,
THE CHRISTIANS . 279
soon becoming weary of these long dark corridors,
gaudy chapels, and absurd traditions , we
are glad once more to gain the street.
No one but an eye-witness can conceive of
the scenes enacted within its walls, during the
festivities of Easter . Multitudes come from
distant lands to witness the gross deception
and ludicrous farce played off by the Greeks ,
who pretend to bring down fire from heaven.
This practice was originated in the following
manner :—
Many years ago, a devout bishop , on making
his accustomed examination of the lamps of the
Church of the Sepulchre, prior to the Easter
ceremonies, found that every drop of oil had
been exhausted ; he filled them with water,
and prayed that success might attend the experiment
. After earnestly putting up his petition,
he was rewarded by seeing the church
flooded with light-fire having descended from
Heaven and miraculously ignited the water.
This encouraged him to repeat the experi280
HADJI IN SYRIA .
ment, which his successors have continued to
perform , on every recurrence of Easter, to the
present day. They extinguish all the lights,
and then conceal themselves within the sepulchre,
having first supplied themselves with
matches and alcohol . Meantime the expectant
people are impatient to behold the wonderful
miracle, which they firmly believe is about to
transpire. While in waiting, there is anything
but order preserved-they crawl on the floor
-pray loudly for the descent of the fire, and
mount one another's shoulders-forming moving
pyramids of human beings . Meanwhile,
the emissaries of the false prophet lustily apply
the whip on all sides, but without the desired
effect ; men run and jump, and gallop to and
fro, through the church. To increase the attractions
of the juggling show, some are dressed
in Jewish costume, and these are treated with
a mock display of anger. The multitude unite
in heaping upon them all manner of insult, and
drive them through the church with derisive
THE CHRISTIANS . 281
shouts of laughter, to show the low repute in
which they are held . A procession is now
formed of priests and bishops , bearing crucifixes
, torches, and other paraphernalia. They
halt before every image , picture , and floweradorned
altar, to beseech the aid of Heaven in
the miracle. The announcement being made
that the multitude may soon expect the appearance
of the heavenly flame , all eyes are
directed to the circular windows of the sepulchre
; and now, from one of them, the fire is
seen to issue forth . A sudden rush is made,
and, not unfrequently, some are killed, and
many wounded, in the struggle of the mighty
mass to reach the flame. Some apply it to
their beards, hands, and faces, while others
burn the edges of the linen intended for their
burial clothes . By means of a cord , even those
in the gallery succeed in lighting their tapers .
Those not as successful as others knock down
their more fortunate brethren , and, by force ,
deprive them of their torches . The bishops,
24 *
282 HADJI IN SYRIA .
who were concealed in the sepulchre, now,
leave their hiding-place, and are borne aloft by
the crowd with frantic shouts of joy.
How hideous the spectacle that reigns
throughout the building-the air dense with
the smoke of thousands of burning tapers- the
people furiously rushing to and fro, each one
loudly shouting and giving thanks in his own
language, and the whips of the Turkish soldiers
in full performance of the duties of their
office !
A shout is heard from the court ! It is the
imperious demand of the Bethlehemites for
admission. They have been despatched by the
Patriarch on the fleetest horses his stable
affords, to obtain some of the holy fire , with
which to light the lamps of the Church of the
Nativity.
The more enlightened portion of the Greek
church acknowledge that this famous miracle
is all a hoax ; but, then, to confess this openly,
would greatly endanger the craft of the priests.
THE CHRISTIANS . 283
Well may the poor deluding priest say with
Macbeth :-
" I am in blood
Stept in so far, that , should I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o'er ."
At another time , during holy week, a scene
equally painful and revolting occurs , when the
service of the crucifixion is enacted by the
Roman Catholics-other sects taking no part
in the performance, except by doing all they
possibly can, to annoy them. The Franciscan
monks commence the ceremonies by forming
a procession, and making the circuit of the
church, chanting the " Miserèrè,” and wafting
incense before each altar . The wax figure ,
representing the Saviour, is taken down from
the cross, and the nails extracted from the
hands and feet, while the people gather
around it and weep. Having wrapped it in
a linen sheet, it is laid on the slab of unction
and anointed . Many discourses being delivered,
and the body taken the grand rounds
284 HADJI IN SYRIA.
of the church, it is sprinkled with rose water,
and carried to the sepulchre, there to remain
until Easter, when another mockery will be
performed called the service of the resurrection
.
Such are the unhallowed scenes presented
to the eyes of the Jews and Mohammedans by
the so- called Christians. Such being the exhibition
of Christianity in Jerusalem, no wonder
that the unbelieving Jew, and scoffing Mohammedan
, still continue in their obstinate rejection
of Christ ! Oh, that this city may
soon be fully supplied with true missionaries
of the Cross , who will faithfully exhibit the
Gospel both in their lives and teachings !